The 335th Signal Command (Theater) (335TSC) is a command of the United States Army Reserve. It has more than 4,000 Active and Reserve Soldiers, providing Signal and Cyber units in direct support of the U.S. Army, Army Reserve exercises, and Homeland Defense missions throughout the United States.
Embracing the motto, "Ready Lightning," The 335th Signal Command (Theater) is one of the Army's four theater signal commands. 
The 335th Signal Command (Theater) has Army Reserve Signal Soldiers assigned to units throughout United States and overseas supporting ongoing military operations.
In 2016, the 335th Signal Command (Theater) became the Army Reserve proponent for Defensive Cyber Operations/Forces for the Army Reserve as the Army Reserve Cyber Operations Group (ARCOG) transitioned from the 76th Operational Readiness Command (ORC) to the 335th Signal Command (Theater). This transition brings Army Reserve Cyber Protection Teams to the 335th Signal Command (Theater).


Current leadership
Commanding General: Major General Jan C. Norris
Command Sergeant Major: Command Sergeant Major William T. Padgelek Jr.
Command Chief Warrant Officer: Chief Warrant Officer Five Lawrence A. Makuakane
Command Executive Officer: Mr. Edward Hriczov Jr.
Deputy Commanding General (Signal): Brigadier General Kimberly Hamilton
Deputy Commanding General (Cyber): Brigadier General Dane M. Sandersen
Chief of Staff: Colonel Matthew Lawson
Updated 17JUN24 by SGT Tarako Braswell, 335th SC (T) Command Public Affairs Office NCO.


Campaign participation credit
Republic of Vietnam
Operation Desert Shield
Operation Desert Storm
Operation Enduring Freedom
Operation Iraqi Freedom
Operation Atlantic Resolve
Operation Inherent Resolve


Provisional Command
Shortly after the September 11 attacks, the 335th Signal Command mobilized reserve soldiers and active Army personnel to Camp Doha, Kuwait. The unit moved to Camp Arifjan, Kuwait in 2005, where it remains today as an enduring presence in the USCENTCOM/USARCENT AOR. Currently, the 335th Signal Command (Theater) (Provisional) provides signal support to USARCENT for Resolute Support Mission (RSM), Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF-OIR).


Shoulder sleeve insignia
Shoulder Sleeve Insignia. Description: A dark blue vertical rectangle arched at top and bottom with a 1⁄8 inch (0.32 cm) white border, 2+1⁄4 inches (5.7 cm) in width and 3 inches (7.6 cm) in height overall having in base the polar section of an orange globe with white grid lines and issuant therefrom two white-edged orange flashes with points converging at top center. Symbolism: Orange and white are the colors associated with the Signal Corps. Dark blue signifies the atmosphere and the flashes and globe are symbolic of the unit's worldwide communication capability. The shoulder sleeve insignia was approved on 30 October 1985 designed by Major Charles K Reber 20 February 1985.


Distinctive unit insignia
Description: A gold color metal and enamel device 1+1⁄8 inches (2.9 cm) in height overall consisting of two quadrates conjoined with point up, the left quadrant of white, the right of black, surmounted by two orange lightning flashes chevronwise and extending above and below the quadrates; in base, a green open wreath of Live Oak, all above a semicircular gold scroll folded back at the base of each flash and inscribed, "READY LIGHTNING" in black letters, areas between quadrates and flashes at top and quadrates and Live Oak in base are pierced. Symbolism: The white and black quadrates and the lightning flashes symbolize the organization's day and night mission to direct and coordinate the operations, training, administration and logistics support of assigned and attached units. The Live Oak, the State Tree of Georgia and a symbol of ever-ready strength in reserve, also alludes to the organization's origin and home station at Atlanta, Georgia. Orange and white are colors used for the Signal Corps. The distinctive unit insignia was originally approved on 10 December 1971 for the 335th Signal Group. It was redesignated for the 335th Signal Brigade on 24 December 1984. The insignia was redesignated for the 335th Signal Command on 16 April 1986.


Past Commanders


References

335th Theater Signal Command Websites as listed below in external links.


External links
Official Site
"335th Theater Signal Command" on "The Institute of Heraldry" Site
"335th Theater Signal Command" on GlobalSecurity.org
