"E85" is a song by American rapper and singer Don Toliver. It was initially released on January 30, 2026, as the opening track on his fifth studio album, Octane, and was sent to US rhythmic contemporary radio on March 17 as the album's fourth single. It was produced by Travis Scott, Aaron Paris, 206Derek and Jaasu. The song contains a sample of "Chest Pain (I Love)" by Malcolm Todd.


Composition
"E85" is a trap song. It is composed of synthesizers, a string arrangement, and guitar. Don Toliver gives a melodic, crooning performance; lyrically, he fantasizes about a trip with his lover on a desert highway.


Critical reception
The song received generally positive reviews. Michael Saponara of Billboard ranked it as the second best song from Octane, comparing the sampling to Kanye West's musical style and commenting that it "leads to a melodic trap mix that sounds foreign to the ear for listeners, but it's addictive to the point you want more." He added, "His elastic vocals change the song's texture, but his ability to surround all of that chaos with a catchy Dumb & Dumber-referencing chorus is what gives 'E85' a chance to be a hit." Robin Murray of Clash wrote "Crushing opener 'E85' is all thick layers of syrupy synths and bold rhymes, a stadium-worthy introduction." Kayla Torres of Exclaim! considered the song to be one of the strongest moments on Octane, writing that the sample "fully transcends you into Toliver's world, bringing back some of that Hardstone Psycho rock instrumentation, with gritty guitar textures cutting through the haze." Amy Haskour of Pitchfork called the song a contender for 2026 song of the summer, describing it as an "effortless collage of genres".


Music video
Don Toliver performed a medley of the song and "Long Way to Calabasas" on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on January 27, 2026.
The full music video was later released on May 13, 2026, with a cameo appearance by Toliver's girlfriend, Kali Uchis.


Charts


Certifications


References
