The 1894–95 French Rugby Union Championship was won by Stade Français that defeated the Olympique in the final.
The tournament was played by four clubs from Paris : Stade Français, Racing, Cosmopolitan Club et Olympique.
The first two of the pool were admitted to the final .


Final


External links
Compte rendu de la finale de 1895, sur lnr.fr

The year 1916 in architecture involved some significant events.


Buildings and structures


Buildings

Colony Club at Park Avenue & 62nd Streer in New York City by Delano & Aldrich with interiors by Elsie de Wolfe, later the East Coast school of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, completed.
Main building of St Hugh's College, Oxford in England by Herbert Tudor Buckland and William Haywood completed.
Church of St Paul, Liverpool in England by Giles Gilbert Scott completed.
Holland House (shipping company offices) in the City of London, designed by Hendrik Petrus Berlage, completed.
Las Lajas Shrine in Colombia, begun; completed 1949.


Events
c. November – The Incorporation of Architects in Scotland founded in Edinburgh.
Publication of the White Pine Series of Architectural Monographs is initiated, continuing until 1940.


Awards
RIBA Royal Gold Medal – Robert Rowand Anderson.
Grand Prix de Rome, architecture: not held.


Births

January 23 – Olaf Andreas Gulbransson, German architect (d. 1961)
April 4 – Robert S. McMillan, American architect (d. 2001)
May 4 – Jane Jacobs, American-Canadian urban theorist (d. 2006)
May 21 – Leonard Manasseh, Singapore-born British architect (d. 2017)
June 29 – John M. Johansen, American architect (d. 2012)
July 1 – Lawrence Halprin, American architect (d. 2009)
August 6 – Dom Mintoff, Maltese architect and Prime Minister (d. 2012)
November 1 – John C. Harkness, American architect (d. 2016)
November 9 – Richard Tyler, British architect (d. 2009)
Dewi-Prys Thomas, British architect (d. 1985)


Deaths
March 22 – Ferdinand Fellner, Austrian architect (b. 1847)
June – Addison Hutton, American architect (b. 1834)
July 1 – First Day on the Somme (killed in action)
Eugene Bourdon, French architect (b. 1870)
Gilbert Waterhouse, English architect and war poet (b. 1883)
July 22 – Hans Jørgen Holm, Danish architect (b. 1835)
October 10 – Antonio Sant'Elia, Italian architect (killed in action) (b. 1888)
December 22 – Gyula Pártos, Hungarian architect (b. 1845)


References

The following are the football (soccer) events of the year 1916 throughout the world.


Events
Numerous national championships in Europe are suspended for the duration of the First World War, with a notable exception of the Netherlands, which continues throughout the hostilities.
25 April: Football Association of Thailand founded.
Thailand: Army United F.C. is founded.


Winners club national championship
Argentina: Racing Club
Austria: Rapid Vienna
Belgium: no national championship
Denmark: KB
England: no national championship
France: no national championship
Germany: no national championship
Hungary: no national championship
Iceland: Fram
Italy: no national championship
Luxembourg: US Hollerich
Netherlands: Willem II
Paraguay: Olimpia
Scotland:
Division One – Celtic
Scottish Cup – No competition
Sweden: AIK
Uruguay: Nacional
Greece: 1913 to 1921 - no championship titles due to the First World War and the Greco-Turkish War of 1919-1922.


International tournaments
South American Championship 1916 in Argentina (July 2, 1916 – July 17, 1916)
 Uruguay


Births


Deaths


Clubs founded
Army United F.C.
5 March: RCD Mallorca
2 July: Swift Hesperange


References

The 1926 North Cumberland by-election was held on 17 September 1926.  The by-election was held due to the succession to the peerage of the incumbent Conservative MP, Donald Howard. It was won by the Conservative candidate Fergus Graham.


Vacancy
The by-election was held due to the succession to the peerage of the incumbent Unionist MP, Donald Howard.  He had been MP here since winning the seat in 1922.


Election history
Cumberland North was created for the 1918 general election. At that election, the Unionist candidate, endorsed by the Coalition Government, was returned unopposed. The first actual electoral contest occurred in 1922 when Howard narrowly held the seat for the Unionists, in a 2-way contest with the Liberal. At the 1923 general election, Howard again narrowly held off the new Liberal challenger, R.D. Holt. At the 1924 general election, a Labour Party candidate intervened for the first time. This damaged Holt's prospects and Howard was easily re-elected;


Candidates
The Cumberland North Unionist Association chose 33-year-old, first time candidate Captain Fergus Graham to defend the seat. He was the son of Sir Richard James Graham, and Lady Mabel Cynthia Duncombe. He was educated at Eton College and Christ Church, Oxford. He served in the European War with the Irish Guards from 1914–19. In 1918 he married Mary Spencer Revell Reade, daughter of Major-General Raymond Northland Revell Reade and Rose Frances Spence.
The Cumberland North Liberal Association re-adopted 58-year-old Liverpool shipowner R.D. Holt as their candidate. In addition to being Liberal candidate here in 1923 and 1924 he had been Liberal MP for Hexham from 1907-18. He first stood as Liberal candidate at Liverpool West Derby in 1904 and 1906. He was also Liberal candidate for Eccles in 1918 and Rossendale in 1922. Holt was born at Toxteth Park, Lancashire, the son of Robert Durning Holt, Lord Mayor of Liverpool, a cotton broker, by his wife Lawrencina Potter. He was educated at Winchester and New College, Oxford. Holt married Eliza Lawrence Wells in 1897. They had three daughters, of whom the eldest, Grace, married Anthony Methuen, 5th Baron Methuen.
The Cumberland North Constituency Labour Party selected H.W. McIntyre as their candidate. He was a schoolmaster from Whitley Bay, Northumberland.


Campaign
Polling Day was set for 17 September 1926.


Liberal divisions
In 1926, the Liberal Party was internally divided between the supporters of party leader H.H. Asquith and parliamentary party chairman David Lloyd George. The 1926 General Strike had seen the two men take differing positions on the issue and Asquith publicly criticised Lloyd George's position. Holt had never been either a supporter of Lloyd George or the interventionist social liberal policies he had advocated in the past or was again advocating. Holt was a member of the 'Liberal Council' a body of Asquithian Liberals intent on frustrating Lloyd George. Although the ailing Asquith was still nominally the Liberal Party leader, increasingly Lloyd George was regarded as the leader in waiting. Therefore the decision of Lloyd George to neither visit the constituency during the by-election nor to issue a letter of support to Holt's candidacy, did not help the Liberal campaign.


Result
There was a swing of 4.3% from Unionist to Liberal, but not a big enough swing to take the Liberals to victory. The Labour Party vote share went up.


Aftermath
Three years later at the 1929 general election, there was a Graham/Holt re-match with a new Labour candidate. Graham was again the victor, despite a further swing of 3.8% to the Liberals;

Graham remained the member until his defeat by a Liberal in 1935. He later served as MP for Darlington from 1951-59. Holt did not stand for parliament again.


References

Municipal elections were held in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, on December 5, 1955. Incumbent mayor Nathan Phillips, elected a year earlier, was easily reelected, defeating Controller Roy E. Belyea and Trotskyist Ross Dowson.
Two referendums were held with the elections. One, which passed, was to extend the municipal term to two years. Previously elections had been held every year. There was also a vote on funding a new Toronto City Hall, which was rejected by voters.


Toronto mayor
Nathan Phillips was opposed for reelection after his first year in office by Board of Control member Roy E. Belyea, who had been a staunch opponent of Phillips during the year. Also running was Trotskyist Ross Dowson.
Results

Nathan Phillips – 70,647
Roy E. Belyea – 26,717
Ross Dowson – 2,374


Plebiscites
Two questions appeared on the ballot. The first was on whether municipal terms of office should be extended to two years from one. The second was to authorize the construction of a proposed new city hall to replace the existing city hall, which had been built in 1899. The proposed structure, designed by a partnership of three leading Toronto architectural forms, would have been a  conservative, symmetrical limestone-clad building in the Modernist style facing a landscaped square, and was widely criticized as "drab and boxy".
Two-year term

For – 48,024
Against – 33,688
Two-year terms would be put in place effective the 1956 Toronto municipal election.
New City Hall

For – 28,449
Against – 32,564
As a result of the rejection of the proposed structure, city council decided, in 1956, to hold an [international architectural design competition to find a better design. A proposal by Finnish architect Viljo Revell would be accepted. Construction of New City Hall began in 1961, and the building was officially opened on 13 September 1965.


Board of Control
There were two vacancies on the Board of Control after Roy E. Belyea's decision to run for mayor and Controller David Balfour's decision to retire. The most senior two Controllers in terms of votes also sat on Metro Toronto Council.
Results

Ford Brand (incumbent) – 59,264
Joseph Cornish (incumbent) – 55,162
William Allen – 53,455
Leslie Saunders – 46,528
Arthur Brown – 41,351
Harry Bradley – 14,802
Alex Hodgins – 13,503
Harry Hunter – 9,493
George Rolland – 3,923
George Stanton – 3,863


City council
Two aldermen were elected per Ward. The alderman with the most votes was declared Senior Alderman and sat on both Toronto City Council and Metro Council.

Ward 1 (Riverdale)

Ken Waters (incumbent) – 6,945
George Phillips – 2,916
Fred Beavis – 2,828
Stanley Hare – 2,137
Christie – 1,403
Montgomery – 960
Basil Ingleby – 886
Jean Brown – 3,412
Ward 2 (Regent Park and Rosedale)

William Dennison (incumbent) – 5,366
Edgar Roxborough (incumbent) – 4,051
May Birchard – 2,127
Douglas Shaw – 1,528
Philip Rowley – 683
Ward 3 (West Downtown and Summerhill)

Ross Parry – 4,149
Howard Phillips   (incumbent)  – 2,802
John MacVicar   (incumbent)  – 2,260
Richard James – 1,737
Ward 4 (The Annex, Kensington Market and Garment District)

Herbert Orliffe (incumbent) – 4,515
Francis Chambers – 3,746
David Rotenberg – 2,086
Robert Laxer – 1,073
Levitt – 824
John Anture – 386
Dorothy Cureatz – 362
Ward 5 (Trinity-Bellwoods and Little Italy)

Philip Givens (incumbent) – 5,605
Harold Menzies – 4,929
Teslia – 1,907
Paul Pauk – 1,228
Tennant – 1,140
Di Stasi – 872
Ward 6 (Davenport and Parkdale)

May Robinson (incumbent) – 10,233
Frank Clifton (incumbent) – 9,473
Grittani – 2,797
George Jackson – 2,274
Ward 7 (Bloor West Village)

William Davidson  (incumbent) – 5,506
John Kucherepa (incumbent) – 4,993
Thomas Wilson – 2,124
William Repka – 653
Ward 8 (The Beaches)

Donald Summerville (incumbent) – 13,139
Albert G. Cranham – 8,456
Brawley – 2,542
Chris Stavro – 1,682
Davis – 1,252
John Square – 529
Ward 9 (North Toronto)

Jean Newman (incumbent) – 14,984
Frank Nash – 12,736
Waterfield – 3,101
Results are taken from the December 6, 1955 Toronto Star and might not exactly match final tallies.


Suburbs
Etobicoke, East York, Mimico, and Forest Hill elected their councils for two-year terms in 1954 and did not hold elections in 1955.


Leaside
Mayor

Charles H. Hiscott – 2,228
Joseph Banigan – 1,073
Hiscott defeated Councillor Joseph Bannigan to replace retiring mayor Howard Burrell
Source: "Suburban elections", The Globe and Mail (1936–2016); Toronto, Ont. [Toronto, Ont] 06 Dec 1955: 13


Long Branch
Reeve

(incumbent) Marie Curtis (acclaimed)


New Toronto
Mayor

(incumbent) Donald R. Russell (acclaimed)


North York
Reeve

(incumbent) Fred J. McMahon – 16,269
Maurice T. Hook – 6,181
McMahon was re-elected, defeating his challenger Deputy Reeve Maurice T. Hook.
Source: "Fred McMahon Is Re-elected N. York Reeve", The Globe and Mail (1936–2016); Toronto, Ont. [Toronto, Ont] 06 Dec 1955: 13


Scarborough
Reeve

Gus Harris – 14,304
(incumbent) Oliver E. Crockford – 10,178
Deputy Reeve

Albert Campbell – 15,369
George Baker – 8,521
Harris defeated the incumbent, Oliver Crockford
Source: "Suburban elections", The Globe and Mail (1936–2016); Toronto, Ont. [Toronto, Ont] 06 Dec 1955: 13


Swansea
Reeve

(incumbent) Dorothy Hague (acclaimed)


Weston
Mayor

(incumbent) Harry Clark (acclaimed)


York
Reeve

(incumbent) Frederick W. Hall – 6,555
Walter Saunders – 6,256
Charles McMaster – 1,039
Norman Penner – 1,006
Source: "Few Brave Cold Rain To Vote in 3 Suburbs",  Taylor, Ewart. The Globe and Mail (1936–2016); Toronto, Ont. [Toronto, Ont]05 Dec 1955: 1


References

Mark Cox was the defending champion, but lost in the second round this year.
Sandy Mayer won the title, defeating Raymond Moore 6–2, 6–4 in the final.


Seeds


Draw
Key


Finals


Top half


Section 1


Section 2


Bottom half


Section 3


Section 4


External links
Main draw

The 1978 Mutual Benefit Life Open, also known as the South Orange Open, was a men's tennis tournament played on outdoor clay courts at the Orange Lawn Tennis Club in South Orange, New Jersey in the United States. The event was part of the 1978 Grand Prix circuit. It was the ninth edition of the tournament and was held from July 31 through August 6, 1978. First-seeded Guillermo Vilas won his second consecutive singles title at the event and earned $15,000 first-prize money.


Finals


Singles
 Guillermo Vilas defeated  José Luis Clerc 6–1, 6–3

It was Vilas' 4th singles title of the year and the 39th of his career.


Doubles
 John McEnroe /  Peter Fleming defeated  Ion Țiriac /  Guillermo Vilas 6–3, 6–3


References


External links
ITF tournament edition details

The 1985–86 season was Burnley's first season in the fourth tier of English football. They were initially managed by Martin Buchan until October 1985, when he was replaced by Tommy Cavanagh as manager.


Appearances and goals


Matches


Football League Division Four
Key

Results


Final league position


FA Cup


League Cup


Football League Trophy


References

The 1985 All-Southwest Conference football team consists of American football players chosen by various organizations for All-Southwest Conference teams for the 1985 NCAA Division I-A football season.  The selectors for the 1984 season included the Associated Press (AP).


Offensive selections


Quarterbacks


Running backs


Tight ends


Wide receivers
Tyrone Thurman, Texas Tech


Centers
Gene Chilton, Texas


Offensive line


Defensive selections


Defensive lineman


Linebackers
Ty Allert, Texas
Brad	Hastings, Texas Tech


Secondary
Gregory Lasker, Arkansas 


Special teams


Place-kickers
Jeff Ward, Texas


References

The 1987 National Soccer League season was the 11th season of the National Soccer League, the former top Australian professional league for association football clubs since its establishment in 1977. The season saw the format returned to a single league of fourteen teams instead of the two-conference system.  Sydney City SC withdrew from the competition after round 1, reducing the competition to 13 teams. The finals series for the Championship was also removed and replaced with the standard non-Championship defining play-offs with the actual Championship determined by a first past the post, won by APIA Leichhardt.


Teams
 Note: Table lists in alphabetical order.


Regular season


League table


Results


Finals series
A top five Finals series was played at the end of the regular season. The Finals series was not considered the Championship for this season.


Preliminary semi-final


Elimination semi-final


Minor semi-final


Major semi-final


Preliminary Final


Grand Final


Season statistics


Top scorers


Hat-tricks


Awards


References
OzFootball Archives – 1987 NSL Season

The 2000 UEFA Super Cup was a football match played on 25 August 2000 between Real Madrid of Spain and Galatasaray of Turkey. Real Madrid qualified by beating Valencia in the 2000 UEFA Champions League Final, while Galatasaray had made it to the Super Cup after beating Arsenal in the 2000 UEFA Cup Final. Galatasaray won the match 2–1, both goals scored by Mário Jardel, the latter a golden goal.
This was the first Super Cup contested by the winners of the UEFA Cup (now the UEFA Europa League). Until 1999, it was contested by the winners of the UEFA Champions League and the winners of the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup, but the Cup Winners' Cup was discontinued after the 1998–99 season.


Venue
The Stade Louis II in Monaco has been the venue for the UEFA Super Cup since 1998. It was built in 1985, and is also the home of AS Monaco, who play in the French league system.


Teams

Steve McManaman was controversially left out of Real Madrid's starting line-up and squad for the match.


Match


Details


See also
2000–01 UEFA Champions League
2000–01 UEFA Cup
2000–01 Galatasaray S.K. season
2000–01 Real Madrid CF season
Galatasaray S.K. in international football
Real Madrid CF in international football competitions


References


External links
2000 UEFA Super Cup at UEFA.com

The 2007 Heineken Open was an ATP Tour tennis tournament held on outdoor hard courts at the ASB Tennis Centre in Auckland, New Zealand from 8 January until 15 January 2007.
The tournament saw third-seeded David Ferrer claim the first of his three tournament titles this year, in his first hardcourt final.


Finals

 David Ferrer defeated  Tommy Robredo, 6–4, 6–2


Doubles

 Jeff Coetzee /  Rogier Wassen defeated  Simon Aspelin /  Chris Haggard, 6–7(9–11), 6–3, [10–2]


See also
2007 ASB Classic – women's tournament


References


External links
Official website
Singles draw
Doubles draw
ATP – tournament profile

The 2015 New Democratic Party of Newfoundland and Labrador leadership election was held March 7, 2015 in St. John's. The election was prompted by Lorraine Michael's announcement on January 6, 2015, that she would step down as leader of the party after a successor was chosen. All NDP members were able to cast ballots by phone or online between February 25 and March 5, 2015, or in person at the party's convention on March 7, 2015. Earle McCurdy was elected with 68% support on the first ballot.


Timeline
October 11, 2011 - In the provincial election NDP wins 5 seats with just under 25% of the popular vote, its best ever result.
October 21, 2013 - Michael announces she had received a letter from her caucus over the previous weekend calling for a leadership election to be held in 2014. The caucus felt that without renewal in the party they would have trouble attracting quality candidates and public support in the 2015 election.
October 29, 2013 - MHAs Dale Kirby (St. John's North) and Christopher Mitchelmore (The Straits – White Bay North) leave the NDP caucus over their dispute with  Michael to sit as Independents. Both subsequently join the Liberals.
May 17, 2014 - Michael passes a leadership review at the NDP convention with 75% support.
November 5, 2014 - Conception Bay South by-election, NDP candidate receives 3.05% of the vote, down from 24.06% in the general election.
November 25, 2014 - By-elections in Trinity-Bay de Verde and Humber East, NDP receives 5.41% and 7.81% of the vote respectively, down from 14.16% and 13.28% in the general election.
January 6, 2015 - Michael announces that she is stepping down as party leader after the party's poor by-election results. Will remain leader until a leadership election can be held.
February 6, 2015 at 5 pm - Deadline for candidates to be nominated.
February 25, 2015 - Online and telephone voting begins.
March 5, 2015 - Online and telephone voting ends.
March 7, 2015 - In person voting by delegates at the NDP convention in St. John's. Ballots counted and a leader declared.


Declared candidates
Chris Bruce 

Bruce is a former NDP executive member who quit the executive following the 2013 caucus revolt against Lorraine Michael's leadership. He works as a barista. Advocates electoral finance reform which would include banning corporate and union donations to political parties; supports pharmacare, and increasing taxes on incomes above $70,000.
Mike Goosney

Goosney steelworker, former Labrador City town councillor. Advocates giving people more of a voice in politics and emphasizes health care, particularly improving service in rural areas.
Earle McCurdy 

McCurdy is former president of the Fish, Food and Allied Workers Union (1993-2014). Endorsed by NDP MP Ryan Cleary and MHA Gerry Rogers. Advocates solutions to the province's fiscal situation and correcting the "democratic deficit" in government.


Declined
Bob Buckingham,  St. John's lawyer.
Ryan Cleary, NDP federal Member of Parliament for St. John's South—Mount Pearl.
George Murphy, NDP MHA for St. John's East.
Sheilagh O'Leary, former St. John's city councillor, NDP by-election candidate in Virginia Waters (2014).
Lana Payne, Atlantic director for Unifor and NDP organizer.
Gerry Rogers, NDP MHA for St. John's Centre.


Results


See also
New Democratic Party of Newfoundland and Labrador
1989 New Democratic Party of Newfoundland and Labrador leadership election
2006 New Democratic Party of Newfoundland and Labrador leadership election
2023 New Democratic Party of Newfoundland and Labrador leadership election


References

The 2016 ITF Women's Circuit – Shenzhen was a professional tennis tournament played on outdoor hard courts. It was the second edition of the tournament and part of the 2016 ITF Women's Circuit, offering a total of $50,000 in prize money. It took place in Shenzhen, China, on 11–17 April 2016.


Singles main draw entrants


Seeds

1 Rankings as of 4 April 2016.


Other entrants
The following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:

 Liang Chen
 Peng Shuai
 Zhang Yukun
 Zheng Wushuang
The following players received entry from the qualifying draw:

 Hsu Chieh-yu
 Dalila Jakupović
 Jessica Pieri
 Sun Xuliu
The following player received entry by a lucky loser:

 Shuko Aoyama
The following player received entry by a protected ranking:

 Miharu Imanishi
The following player received entry by a junior exempt:

 Katie Swan


Champions


Singles

 Wang Qiang def.  Mayo Hibi, 6–2, 6–0


Doubles

 Shuko Aoyama /  Makoto Ninomiya def.  Liang Chen /  Wang Yafan, 7–6(7–5), 6–4


External links
2016 ITF Women's Circuit – Shenzhen at ITFtennis.com

The diluted disinfectants crisis in Romania of 2016 characterized a critical time in the evolution of the national health system, arose as a result of researching nonconformities in relation to legal rules, parameters of products disinfectants purchased and used in medical institutions in Romania.
In the spring of 2016, the press revealed that the Romanian health system was widely using diluted disinfectants bought from Hexi Pharma, which had been involved in a similar scandal back in 2006.


Background and preliminary
After some of the victims of Colectiv nightclub fire died in nosocomial infections, the subject came to the attention of the press. Although their incidence was reported to be low and declining, it was already known that those reports were false, and actual results were if anything artificially increased by unnecessary admissions of people who were suffering from diseases that require hospitalization.
However, for years, there were indications that some disinfectants used in hospitals did not meet the standards required. Thus, the activity report of the Directorate of Public Health Bucharest recorded having been notified by the Public Health Department of Arad that the latter had found a non-conforming product, Polyiodine Scrub, produced by Hexi Pharma. Thor, another product made by Hexi Pharma, had been tested in France in laboratories of a competitor, ANIOS, which found a different recipe to the one indicated. It also showed significant dilution had taken place; however the information was not made public at the time. The same disinfectant, Thor, had been identified since 2006 as responsible for infecting newborns in a maternity hospital in Argeș County. The result was a series of criminal complaints against the manufacturer: Farma University, which has since changed its name to Hexi Pharma.


Reactions
On 6 May 2016, around five hundred people protested in Bucharest, amid a severe sub financing of the health system in a country where thousands of Romanian specialists emigrate annually, and bribery and informal payments are practices endemic in hospitals nationwide.
On 8 May 2016, amid the scandal, Health Minister Patriciu Achimaș-Cadariu resigned. Prime Minister Dacian Cioloș assumed the interim  until the appointment of his successor, Vlad Voiculescu, on 20 May 2016.


References


External links
Iacob, Bogdan Tiberiu (22 May 2016). "Scandalul Hexi Pharma. FRĂȚIA IOHANNIS - SRI, IPOTEZELE UNUI JURNALIST" [The Hexi Pharma Scandal - Brotherhood of Iohannis - Romanian Intelligence Service, the Hypothesis of a Journalist]. Evenimentul Zilei (in Romanian). Retrieved November 16, 2022.

The 2018–19 USC Upstate Spartans men's basketball team represented the University of South Carolina Upstate during the 2018–19 NCAA Division I men's basketball season. The Spartans, led by first-year head coach Dave Dickerson, played their home games at the G. B. Hodge Center in Spartanburg, South Carolina as first-year members of the Big South Conference.


Previous season
The Spartans finished the 2017–18 season 7–25, 2–12 in ASUN play to finish in last place. They lost in the quarterfinals of the ASUN tournament to Florida Gulf Coast.
After the season, USC Upstate fired head coach Kyle Perry on March 1, less than five months after being named full-time head coach of the Spartans. On March 30, the school hired former Tulane head coach Dave Dickerson for the job.
This season marked the final season for USC Upstate as members of the Atlantic Sun Conference, as the school announced on November 15, 2017 that they will be moving to the Big South Conference for the 2018–19 season.


Roster


Schedule and results

Despite both being members of the Big South, their meeting with Gardner–Webb on November 28 will be considered a non-conference game. The game was scheduled prior to USC Upstate joining the conference. Their meeting on January 12 will be a conference game.


References

The 2019 AMA Motocross Championship season is the 47th AMA Motocross National Championship season, the premier motocross series in USA. Eli Tomac goes into the season as the defending champion in the 450 class, after taking his second 450 national title in 2018.


Calendar and Results


450cc


250cc


450cc


Riders Championship


250cc


Riders Championship


References

The 2019 Boston College Eagles men's soccer team represented Boston College during the 2019 NCAA Division I men's soccer season.  The Eagles were led by head coach Ed Kelly, in his fourteenth season.  They played home games at Newton Soccer Complex.  This was the team's 53rd season playing organized men's college soccer and their 15th playing in the Atlantic Coast Conference.


Background

The 2018 Boston College men's soccer team finished the season with a 4–8–4 overall record and a 2–5–1 ACC record.  The Eagles were seeded ninth–overall in the 2018 ACC Men's Soccer Tournament, where they lost in the first round to NC State.
The Eagles were not invited to the 2018 NCAA Division I Men's Soccer Tournament, and did not have any players selected in the 2019 MLS SuperDraft.


Player movement


Players leaving


Players arriving


Squad


Roster
Updated August 19, 2019

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


Team management

Source:


Schedule
Source:


Awards and honors


Rankings


References

The men's K-1 1000 metres competition at the 2019 ICF Canoe Sprint World Championships in Szeged took place at the Olympic Centre of Szeged.


Schedule
The schedule was as follows:

All times are Central European Summer Time (UTC+2)


Results


Heats
The four fastest boats in each heat, plus the three fastest fifth-place boats advanced to the semifinals.


Heat 1


Heat 2


Heat 3


Heat 4


Heat 5


Heat 6


Semifinals
Qualification in each semi was as follows:
The fastest three boats advanced to the A final.
The next three fastest boats advanced to the B final.
The seventh, eighth and ninth-place boats advanced to the C final.


Semifinal 1


Semifinal 2


Semifinal 3


Finals


Final C
Competitors in this final raced for positions 19 to 27.


Final B
Competitors in this final raced for positions 10 to 18.


Final A
Competitors in this final raced for positions 1 to 9, with medals going to the top three.


References

Miomir Kecmanović was the defending champion, but chose to compete at the Summer Olympics instead.
Casper Ruud won his fifth ATP Tour title, defeating Pedro Martínez in the final, 6–1, 4–6, 6–3. It was Ruud's third consecutive title in as many weeks.


Seeds
The top four seeds received a bye into the second round. 


Draw
Key


Finals


Top half


Bottom half


Qualifying


Seeds


Qualifiers


Lucky losers


Qualifying draw


First qualifier


Second qualifier


Third qualifier


Fourth qualifier


References

Main draw
Qualifying draw

The 2022–23 season was the 94th season in the history of Benevento Calcio and their second consecutive season in the second division. The club participated in Serie B and the Coppa Italia.


Players
As of 31 January 2023

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


Out on loan

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


Transfers


Pre-season and friendlies
  Win
  Draw
  Loss
  Fixtures


Competitions


Overall record


Serie B


League table


Results summary


Results by round


Matches
The league fixtures will be announced on 15 July 2022.


Coppa Italia


See also
History of Benevento Calcio


References

Heather Watson was the defending champion from when the tournament was last held in 2019 as part of the ITF Women's World Tennis Tour, but lost in the second round to Chloé Paquet.
Valentini Grammatikopoulou won the title, defeating Lucia Bronzetti in the final, 6–2, 6–4.


Seeds


Draw
Key


Finals


Top half


Bottom half


Qualifying


Seeds


Qualifiers


Lucky loser


Qualifying draw


First qualifier


Second qualifier


Third qualifier


Fourth qualifier


References

Main Draw
Qualifying Draw

The 2023 Ceuta Assembly election was held on Sunday, 28 May 2023, to elect the 8th Assembly of the autonomous city of Ceuta. All 25 seats in the Assembly were up for election. The election was held simultaneously with regional elections in twelve autonomous communities and local elections all throughout Spain.


Electoral system
The Assembly of Ceuta was the top-tier administrative and governing body of the autonomous city of Ceuta. Voting for the Assembly was on the basis of universal suffrage, which comprised all nationals over eighteen, registered and residing in the municipality of Ceuta and in full enjoyment of their political rights, as well as resident non-national European citizens and those whose country of origin allowed Spanish nationals to vote in their own elections by virtue of a treaty.
The 25 members of the Assembly of Ceuta were elected using the D'Hondt method and a closed list proportional representation, with a threshold of five percent of valid votes—which included blank ballots—being applied.
The Mayor-President was indirectly elected by the plenary assembly. A legal clause required that mayoral candidates earned the vote of an absolute majority of councillors, or else the candidate of the most-voted party in the assembly was to be automatically appointed to the post. In the event of a tie, the appointee would be determined by lot.


Parties and candidates
The electoral law allowed for parties and federations registered in the interior ministry, coalitions and groupings of electors to present lists of candidates. Parties and federations intending to form a coalition ahead of an election were required to inform the relevant Electoral Commission within ten days of the election call, whereas groupings of electors needed to secure the signature of at least one percent of the electorate in the constituencies for which they sought election, disallowing electors from signing for more than one list of candidates.


Opinion polls
The tables below list opinion polling results in reverse chronological order, showing the most recent first and using the dates when the survey fieldwork was done, as opposed to the date of publication. Where the fieldwork dates are unknown, the date of publication is given instead. The highest percentage figure in each polling survey is displayed with its background shaded in the leading party's colour. If a tie ensues, this is applied to the figures with the highest percentages. The "Lead" column on the right shows the percentage-point difference between the parties with the highest percentages in a poll.


Graphical summary


Voting intention estimates
The table below lists weighted voting intention estimates. Refusals are generally excluded from the party vote percentages, while question wording and the treatment of "don't know" responses and those not intending to vote may vary between polling organisations. When available, seat projections determined by the polling organisations are displayed below (or in place of) the percentages in a smaller font; 13 seats were required for an absolute majority in the Assembly of Ceuta.


Results


Aftermath


Notes


References
Opinion poll sources

Other

The 335th Signal Command (Theater) (335TSC) is a command of the United States Army Reserve. It has more than 4,000 Active and Reserve Soldiers, providing Signal and Cyber units in direct support of the U.S. Army, Army Reserve exercises, and Homeland Defense missions throughout the United States.
Embracing the motto, "Ready Lightning," The 335th Signal Command (Theater) is one of the Army's four theater signal commands. 
The 335th Signal Command (Theater) has Army Reserve Signal Soldiers assigned to units throughout United States and overseas supporting ongoing military operations.
In 2016, the 335th Signal Command (Theater) became the Army Reserve proponent for Defensive Cyber Operations/Forces for the Army Reserve as the Army Reserve Cyber Operations Group (ARCOG) transitioned from the 76th Operational Readiness Command (ORC) to the 335th Signal Command (Theater). This transition brings Army Reserve Cyber Protection Teams to the 335th Signal Command (Theater).


Current leadership
Commanding General: Major General Jan C. Norris
Command Sergeant Major: Command Sergeant Major William T. Padgelek Jr.
Command Chief Warrant Officer: Chief Warrant Officer Five Lawrence A. Makuakane
Command Executive Officer: Mr. Edward Hriczov Jr.
Deputy Commanding General (Signal): Brigadier General Kimberly Hamilton
Deputy Commanding General (Cyber): Brigadier General Dane M. Sandersen
Chief of Staff: Colonel Matthew Lawson
Updated 17JUN24 by SGT Tarako Braswell, 335th SC (T) Command Public Affairs Office NCO.


Campaign participation credit
Republic of Vietnam
Operation Desert Shield
Operation Desert Storm
Operation Enduring Freedom
Operation Iraqi Freedom
Operation Atlantic Resolve
Operation Inherent Resolve


Provisional Command
Shortly after the September 11 attacks, the 335th Signal Command mobilized reserve soldiers and active Army personnel to Camp Doha, Kuwait. The unit moved to Camp Arifjan, Kuwait in 2005, where it remains today as an enduring presence in the USCENTCOM/USARCENT AOR. Currently, the 335th Signal Command (Theater) (Provisional) provides signal support to USARCENT for Resolute Support Mission (RSM), Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF-OIR).


Shoulder sleeve insignia
Shoulder Sleeve Insignia. Description: A dark blue vertical rectangle arched at top and bottom with a 1⁄8 inch (0.32 cm) white border, 2+1⁄4 inches (5.7 cm) in width and 3 inches (7.6 cm) in height overall having in base the polar section of an orange globe with white grid lines and issuant therefrom two white-edged orange flashes with points converging at top center. Symbolism: Orange and white are the colors associated with the Signal Corps. Dark blue signifies the atmosphere and the flashes and globe are symbolic of the unit's worldwide communication capability. The shoulder sleeve insignia was approved on 30 October 1985 designed by Major Charles K Reber 20 February 1985.


Distinctive unit insignia
Description: A gold color metal and enamel device 1+1⁄8 inches (2.9 cm) in height overall consisting of two quadrates conjoined with point up, the left quadrant of white, the right of black, surmounted by two orange lightning flashes chevronwise and extending above and below the quadrates; in base, a green open wreath of Live Oak, all above a semicircular gold scroll folded back at the base of each flash and inscribed, "READY LIGHTNING" in black letters, areas between quadrates and flashes at top and quadrates and Live Oak in base are pierced. Symbolism: The white and black quadrates and the lightning flashes symbolize the organization's day and night mission to direct and coordinate the operations, training, administration and logistics support of assigned and attached units. The Live Oak, the State Tree of Georgia and a symbol of ever-ready strength in reserve, also alludes to the organization's origin and home station at Atlanta, Georgia. Orange and white are colors used for the Signal Corps. The distinctive unit insignia was originally approved on 10 December 1971 for the 335th Signal Group. It was redesignated for the 335th Signal Brigade on 24 December 1984. The insignia was redesignated for the 335th Signal Command on 16 April 1986.


Past Commanders


References

335th Theater Signal Command Websites as listed below in external links.


External links
Official Site
"335th Theater Signal Command" on "The Institute of Heraldry" Site
"335th Theater Signal Command" on GlobalSecurity.org

The 4x4 house is a private residential house designed by the Japanese architect Tadao Ando and located in Tarumi-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, on the coast of the Inland Sea in Japan.  


History
The 4x4 house plan was built in the aftermath of the Great Hanshin earthquake. The architecture magazine Brutus invited its readers to submit development ideas to a selection of architects. The latter picked this sea-front site idea. The redevelopment project was comprised or narrow and chaotic strips of lands. The house was built in 2003.
The lot, about 65 square meters, was the property of Yoshinari Nakata. 1/4 of the land is regularly flooded by seawater. Nakata was the reader who suggested his own lot to the Brutus call-to-submission. Tadao Ando was interested by the site's limitations and its closeness to the 1995 earthquake.
An identical house (4x4 house II) was commissioned to Ando Tadao by the neighbor of the adjacent plot (built in 2004), but the two twin houses were built using different materials. The 4x4 has a staircase and is made of concrete, and its copy has an elevator and is made of wood (laminated pine from Oregon and Paulownia wood). Using different materials was a suggestion made by the architect. The architect has often worked on twin and/or dualistic structures (and he has a twin brother). This brutalist modernist house on the beach is close to surrealistic.
The architect has also published an addition proposition for the house, a straight concrete staircase descending from the house to the sandy beach, with a square concrete patio at the base of the stairs that sinks under water when the sea is at full tide.
Before the construction of the 4x4 house, the authorities did not consider this strip of land to be constructible.


Description
The 4x4 house is a four story tower with 4m x 4m dimensions (13x13 feet) in a 16.5 foot-square space. The overall shape and location of the building is evocative of a watchtower.
The house is encased in concrete and deep in the ground to resist to lateral forces. The bedrooms are on the intermediary floors, and the kitchen and living room are on the top floor. The organization of the house follows the principles of the Ken organisational framework, and is often mentioned as an example of Jutaku houses.
The last floor is a 4x4m cube that is displaced exactly 1m from the vertical axis of the building in the direction of the water, giving a sensation of being at sea when looking at the horizon. The house has a direct view on the Akashi Kaikyō Bridge. Located next to a rail track, a major road, a sea corridor, and an airport, the house is very noisy.


References

53 Squadron may refer to:

No. 53 Squadron PAF, Pakistan
No. 53 Squadron RAF, United Kingdom
53 Squadron, Egypt; see structure of the Egyptian Air Force
53rd Squadron, Qatar Emiri Air Force
53rd Fighter Squadron "Warhawks", Romania
53d Aero Squadron, Air Service, United States Army; see list of American aero squadrons
53rd Airlift Squadron, United States Air Force
53rd Fighter Squadron, United States Air Force
53rd Space Operations Squadron, United States Space Force
53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron, United States Air Force
VF-53, United States Navy

95th Street is a major east–west highway on Chicago's South Side, and in the southwest suburbs, is designated as 9500 South in Chicago's address system. 95th Street is 11 miles (18 km) south of Madison Street.


Route description
95th Street begins at Wolf's Crossing Road in Naperville and continues east, becoming Will County Highway 89 from Plainfield-Naperville Road, curving southeast upon entering Bolingbrook, ending the county highway at DuPage River bridge. Its eastern terminus of western section of 95th Street is at Boughton Road, continuing as Kings Road.
The street resumes in Cook County at IL 171 (Archer Avenue) in Willow Springs, east of the Des Plaines River, in Palos Township.  From there it runs through Spears Woods, part of the Palos Forest Preserves.  Before exiting the preserves, it intersects La Grange Road (US 12/US 20/US 45). US 12 and 20 turn onto 95th Street, making it a much bigger road. Route 45 continues south on La Grange Road. Continuing east, 95th Street crosses major interstate and state routes, including: Interstate 294 (Tri-State Tollway, Harlem Avenue (Illinois Route 43), Cicero Avenue (Illinois Route 50), Pulaski Road, Kedzie Avenue, Halsted Street (Illinois Route 1). At State Street, 95th crosses Interstate 94 (the Dan Ryan Expressway). It is just south of 95th that Interstate 57 ends at I-94. Continuing east, 95th Street crosses Interstate 90 (Chicago Skyway), the Calumet River, before ending at Ewing Avenue/Avenue L (US 41) on Lake Michigan.


Communities and sites
In the city of Chicago, 95th Street passes through the neighborhoods of Beverly, Washington Heights and Roseland, then marks the borders between Burnside and Pullman and between Calumet Heights and South Deering before crossing the Calumet River to enter the East Side neighborhood. Chicago State University is located on 95th Street between Cottage Grove and King Drive.


Transportation

Taking into account its entire length, 95th Street is the longest east–west road on Chicago's South Side, and is served by a number of trains and buses (75th Street is longer as a whole, but has its majority in DuPage County rather than Chicago and Cook County.) The 95th/Dan Ryan terminal of the Red Line is one of the busiest in the system. It is a transfer point for people living on the far south side or in the suburbs. The CTA 95 95th and Pace 381 buses run along 95th Street. Additionally, the 29 State, 34 South Michigan, 100 Jeffery Manor Express, 103 West 103rd, 106 East 103rd, 108 Halsted/95th, 111 111th/King Drive, 112 Vincennes/111th, 115 Pullman/115th, and 119 Michigan/119th buses, as well as the Pace 352 Halsted, 353 95th/Dan Ryan CTA/Calumet City/Homewood, 359 Robbins/South Kedzie Avenue, and 395 95th/Dan Ryan CTA/UPS Hodgkins buses, start and end at 95th/Dan Ryan station. A number of Metra lines cross 95th Street, including: two stops on the Rock Island District line at 95th Street–Longwood and 95th Street–Beverly Hills, the Electric Main and Blue Island branches at 95th Street/CSU, and the SouthWest Service at Oak Lawn. The South Shore Line also crosses 95th Street at the Metra Electric station but does not stop there.


In popular culture
The 95th Street bridge over the Calumet River is the one used for the "Draw Bridge Jump" scene in Blues Brothers at the beginning of the film.


Major intersections


References


External links
 Media related to 95th Street, Chicago at Wikimedia Commons

"A Man Needs a Maid" is a song written by Neil Young that was first released on his 1972 album Harvest. It is one of two songs on Harvest on which Young is accompanied by the London Symphony Orchestra. It has appeared on several of Young's live and compilation albums.


Lyrics and music
Music critic Johnny Rogan described the melody of "A Man Needs a Maid" as "haunting". AllMusic critic William Ruhlmann said the words were "an impressionistic musing by a man who is contemplating the start of a new romantic relationship".
The lyrics of "A Man Needs a Maid" have generated controversy over chauvinistic interpretations. This may be the result of Young using the term "maid" with two meanings, first as a housekeeper to cook and clean for him, then leave. However, the rest of the lyrics express Young's feelings of insecurity, trying to balance his need for an equal relationship with a woman against his fear of being hurt by that relationship and just "living alone and hiring help". This is apparent from the opening lines "My life is changin' in so many ways/I don't know who to trust anymore" before he starts singing about thinking of getting a maid. And even though he sings of the maid going away after doing the housework, after singing that "a man needs a maid" he goes on to ask "When will I see you again?" Music journalist Nigel Williamson adds another explanation for Young's desire for a maid, because he wrote the song while hospitalized after back surgery, so he literally did then need the services of a maid. Responding to the accusation of sexism from literal readings of the song, Young once pointed out that "Robin Hood loved a maid long before women's liberation".

Perhaps anticipating such criticism, Young remarked at an early performance of the song at the Boston Music Hall on January 21, 1971: This is another new song. It's called "A Man Needs a Maid". It's kind of a . . . it doesn't really mean what it says. It's just the idea that anyone would think enough to say something like that would show that something else was happening. [short laugh] So don't take it personally when I say it. I don't really want a maid.
In the last verse, Young describes watching a movie and falling in love with the actress. This is an autobiographical reference to Young falling in love with actress Carrie Snodgress, who would become the mother of Young's first son. Young had become smitten by Snodgress when he saw her playing the role of the titular housewife in the movie Diary of a Mad Housewife.


Background and recording
In live performances before recording Harvest, Young sang "A Man Needs a Maid" accompanying himself on piano. The earliest recordings were performed as a medley with the soon to be #1 hit "Heart of Gold". Later in the tour, "Heart of Gold" was sung separately with acoustic guitar. For the Harvest recording, Young added accompaniment by the London Symphony Orchestra, recorded at Barking Town Hall (later the Broadway theatre) in London in February 1971. Jack Nitzsche provided the orchestral arrangement. The Harvest recording begins with Young on solo piano with the orchestral accompaniment joining after the first statement of "a man needs a maid". Several critics, including Johnny Rogan, found the orchestral accompaniment to be overblown. Sam Inglis, however, claims that the orchestra "underline[s] the dynamics of Young's performance in the same way a film composer might reinforce the twists and turns of some high melodrama". As an example, Inglis notes the point at which Young cries out passionately for a "mai-ai-ai-aid" while "pounding" the piano, and the piccolo plays a "warning note" before the strings "soar upwards".


Reception
Rolling Stone ranked "A Man Needs a Maid" as the #62 all time Neil Young song, calling it "a moving union of grandeur and vulnerability". Although some critics found the orchestral accompaniment to be overblown, Rolling Stone described it as "dramatic," and Bob Dylan liked it. Young has stated that "Some people thought that the arrangement was overdone but Bob Dylan told me it was one of his favorites. I listened closer to Bob." Young himself stated that the song is "overblown, but it's great". Village Voice critic Robert Christgau described the song as a "major" song that was "gratifying musically". Rolling Stone critic John Mendelsohn described it as being "particularly interesting" for how Young "treats his favorite theme — his inability to find and keep a lover — in a novel and arrestingly brazen (in terms of our society's accelerating consciousness of women's rights) manner". The New Rolling Stone Album Guide critic Robert Sheffield described the lyrics as being "unintentionally hilarious". Pitchfork critic Mark Richardson said the song is "one of [Young's] stranger creations, an affecting portrait of loneliness undercut with a clumsy, lunkheaded chorus refrain, the sincerity of which has never been quite clear".
Young included "A Man Needs a Maid" on his 1977 triple album Decade. A live version of the original version of the song containing "Heart of Gold" was included on Live at Massey Hall 1971 Another live performance of this version was included on the 2000 bootleg album There's a World.
The National Lampoon comedy troupe performed a song in the mid-70s "Old Maid (Southern California Brings Me Down)," which parodied "A Man Needs a Maid" with lyrics such as "I need someone to live with me, keep my bed warm...and sew patches on my jeans."
Emily Haines interpreted the song with "The Maid Needs a Maid".


Personnel
Neil Young – piano, vocals
London Symphony Orchestra – strings


References

The A. M. Qattan Foundation (Arabic: مؤسسة عبد المحسن القطان, romanized: Muʔassasa ʕAbd al-Muḥsin al-Qaṭṭān) is a Palestinian not-for-profit developmental organisation based in Ramallah.
It was founded in 1993 by the Palestinian businessman and politician Abdel Mohsin Al-Qattan. The chairman is his son Omar Al-Qattan.
In June 2018, the Foundation opened a $21 million headquarters building and arts centre in Ramallah.
The foundation was involved in a bid to add Palestinian hikaye to UNESCO's list of intangible cultural heritage.


References


External links
Official website

Aan... Aharenves Loabivin is a 2002 Maldivian romantic drama film written and directed by Abdul Faththaah. Produced by Ahmed Wafau under Odiomart Productions, the film stars Ali Seezan, Sheela Najeeb, Niuma Mohamed and Aminath Rasheedha in pivotal roles.


Premise
Sara, an obedient and the only child in the family started working at an office and joined a computer training class where she meets Uzair (Zabeer) who reveals that he had been previously married to a woman, Aminath (Sheereen Abdul Wahid), who died in labor. Sara goes to an office trip with her colleague Fazee (Neena Saleem) and a photographer, Jina (Ali Seezan) who clicked her photos without her consent. They later bonds at the trip and became friends while Jina started growing feelings towards Sara much to Suzy's (Niuma Mohamed) disappointment who is secretly in love with Jina.


Cast
Ali Seezan as Jina
Sheela Najeeb as Sara
Niuma Mohamed as Suzy
Aminath Rasheedha as Sara's mother
Neena Saleem as Fazee
Haajara Abdul Kareem as Suzy's mother
Zabeer as Uzair
Sheereen Abdul Wahid as Aminath
Ahmed Saeed as Ammadey
Satthar Ibrahim Manik as Manik


Soundtrack


References

Acacia steedmanii is a shrub or tree of the genus Acacia and the subgenus Phyllodineae. It is native to an area in the  Wheatbelt, Pilbara and Goldfields regions of Western Australia.
The shrub or tree typically grows to a height of 1 to 4 metres (3 to 13 ft). It blooms from August to September and produces yellow flowers.
There are two recognised subspecies:

Acacia steedmanii subsp. borealis
Acacia steedmanii subsp. steedmanii


See also
List of Acacia species


References

Actinolema is a genus of plants in the family Apiaceae. They are found in Southwest Asia and the Caucasus.
Two species are recognised:

Actinolema eryngioides Fenzl
Actinolema macrolema Boiss.


References

Afferentur regi (Led to the king), WAB 1, is a motet, which Anton Bruckner composed on 7 November 1861 on the text of the Offertorium of the Missa pro Virgine et Martyre.


History
Afferentur regi is the second of the two "great motets" during a "fruitful though brief" period of Bruckner's compositional career following Sechter's tuition, the other motet being the Ave Maria WAB 6. Afferentur regi was premiered in St. Florian Abbey on the feast day of Saint Lucy, 13 December 1861.
An early draft for choir alone was found in a monastic archive at Kremsmünster Abbey. The original manuscript is not extant, but several transcriptions were found in the archive of St. Florian Abbey. Many years later, in 1885, Bruckner dedicated the work as an Offertorium als Graduale (offertory as gradual) to Johann Baptist Burgstaller, choir director of the New Cathedral in Linz.
The work was edited in 1922 as an addendum to band 11–12 of Musica Divina, Vienna. It is put in Band XXI/21 of the Gesamtausgabe.


Text
The text is derived from Psalms 45:15-16, which is Psalm 44 in the Vulgata.


Setting

The 38-bars piece scored in F major for mixed choir and three trombones ad libitum is a polyphonic offertory. The piece is in ternary form, with an opening motive drawn from a pre-existing Latin plainchant.
In the first part (bars 1–7), "Afferentur regi" is sung in canon by the alto and tenor voices, and with inverted motif by the bass and soprano voices. A similar pattern is repeated in bars 8–15 on "proximae ejus". The middle section (bars 15–24), which begins with "et exultatione" by the bass, similarly as "usque in aeternum" in bars 299-309 of Bruckner's later Te Deum, is stylistically similar to faux bourdon, a technique employed primarily in medieval and Renaissance music. It is followed by a general pause. The third part (bars 25–38) on "adducentur in templum" begins as the first part and ends on a pedal point on the tonic.
Keith W. Kinder suggests that its use of counterpoint may be a reflection of Bruckner's sense of liberation from the "prohibition on free composition" imposed by his former composition teacher, Simon Sechter. Dermot Gault notes that in this work Bruckner "wears his learning lightly" in the contrapuntal writing.
Bruckner quoted from the Afferentur regi in the movement Qui cum Patre et Filio, part of the Credo of the Mass in D minor.


Selected discography
Bruckner's Afferentur regi was recorded at first in 1965 by Giulio Bertola with the Coro Polifonico Italiano a cappella (LP: Angelicum LPA 5989)
A selection of the about 30 recordings:

Simon Halsey, City of Birmingham Symphony Wind Ensemble & Chorus, Bruckner: Mass in E minor & Motets – Conifer CDCF 192, 1990
Hans-Christoph Rademann, NDR Chor Hamburg, Anton Bruckner: Ave Maria – Carus 83.151, 2000
Dan-Olof Stenlund, Malmö Chamber Choir, Ausgewählte Werke.  MKKCD 051, 2004
Michael Stenov, Cantores Carmeli, Benefizkonzert Karmelitenkirche Linz – CD/DVD issued by the choir, 2006, and on YouTube.
Duncan Ferguson, Choir of St. Mary's Cathedral of Edinburgh, Bruckner: Motets  – CD: Delphian Records DCD34071, 2010
Philipp Ahmann, MDR Rundfunkchor Leipzig, Anton Bruckner & Michael Haydn - Motets – SACD: Pentatone PTC 5186 868, 2021


References


Sources
Max Auer, Anton Bruckner als Kirchenmusiker, G. Bosse, Regensburg, 1927
Anton Bruckner – Sämtliche Werke, Band XXI: Kleine Kirchenmusikwerke, Musikwissenschaftlicher Verlag der Internationalen Bruckner-Gesellschaft, Hans Bauernfeind and Leopold Nowak (Editor), Vienna, 1984/2001
Cornelis van Zwol, Anton Bruckner 1824–1896 – Leven en werken, uitg. Thoth, Bussum, Netherlands, 2012. ISBN 978-90-6868-590-9


External links
Afferentur regi, WAB 1: Scores at the International Music Score Library Project
Free scores for Afferentur regi in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki)
Afferentur regi F-Dur, WAB 1 Critical discography by Hans Roelofs (in German)
Can be heard on YouTube:
A live performance by Johannes Kleinjung with the Universitätschor München (2011):  Afferentur regi
A live performance by Gilles Michels with the Student Choir of Utrecht (24 June 2017): Afferentur regi – Bruckner | USKO 
A live performance by Andrew Lewis with the Elgin Master Chorale (26 February 2018): Bruckner - Afferentur regi, WAB 1

From 1900 to 1959 setbacks for African Americans occurred following the restoration of white supremacy and political control across the South. These Redeemers, who undid Reconstruction era policies, retook control of local, state, and federal offices, restoring white supremacy across the South in government and civil life. African-Americans were largely barred from voting and almost entirely obstructed from public office in former Confederate states under the Jim Crow regime. The following is a list of African-American holders of public office from 1900 to 1959
The era also saw the appointment or election of the first African-American women to serve in elected public office. Minnie Buckingham Harper became the first African-American woman to serve in a state legislature when she was appointed in 1928 to serve out the remainder of her husband's term in the West Virginia House of Delegates. Crystal Bird Fauset was the first Black woman elected to a legislature when was elected to the Pennsylvania House in 1938. African-American women were also elected or appointed to state legislatures in Alaska, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Maryland, New Jersey and New York.
The number of African American officeholders finally saw dramatic increases following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.


Federal office


House of Representatives
Oscar Stanton De Priest (1929-1953) from Chicago, Illinois
Arthur Wergs Mitchell (1935-1943) from Chicago, Illinois
Shirley A. Chisholm (1977-1981) from New York City's Bedstuy, Brooklyn neighborhood
William L. Dawson (1943-1970) from Chicago, Illinois
Adam Clayton Powell Jr. (1945-1971) from New York City's Harlem neighborhood
Charles Diggs (1955-1980) from Detroit, Michigan
Robert N. C. Nix Sr. (1958-1979) from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania


State office


Alaska


House
Blanche McSmith (1959)


California


Assembly
Frederick Madison Roberts (1918) representing Los Angeles, California
Augustus Hawkins (1934-1960) representing Los Angeles, California


Colorado


Senate
George L. Brown (1957), representing Denver M, Colorado. He also served as Lieutenant Governor


House
George L. Brown (1955)


Connecticut


House
Wilfred X. Johnson (1958), the Wilfred X. Johnson House where he lived is listed on the National Register of Historic Places


Delaware


House
William J. Winchester (1948)


Georgia


House
H. F. McKay, state representative from Liberty County (1900-1901) 
Lectured Crawford, state representative from McIntosh County (1886-1887, 1890–1891, 1900–1901)
W. H. Rogers, state representative from McIntosh County (1902-1908)
Amos Rogers
Hercules Wilson (1882-1885)
Anthony Wilson, state representative from Camden County, Georgia (1884-1888?) (?-1893)
Frasier / Frazier, first name unknown, state representative from Liberty County, Georgia
Samuel A. McIvor, state representative for Liberty County, Georgia


Illinois


Senate
Adelbert H. Roberts (1924)
William E. King (1934)
William A. Wallace (1938)
Christopher C. Wimbish (1942)
Fred J. Smith (1954)


House
John G. Jones (1900)
Edward D. Green (1904)
Alexander Lane (1907)
Robert R. Jackson (1912)
Sheadrick B. Turner (1914)
Benjamin H. Lucas (1916)
Warren B. Douglass (1918)
George T. Kersey (1922)
Charles A. Griffin (1924)
William J. Warfield (1928)
Charles J. Jenkins (1930)
Harris B. Gaines (1930)
Aubrey H. Smith (1934)
Ernest A. Greene (1936)
Richard A. Harewood (1936)
Andrew A. Torrence (1938)
Dudley S. Martin (1940)
Corneal A. Davis (1943)
Christopher C. Wimbish (1943)
Charles T. Sykes (1944)
Edward A. Welters (1944)
James Y. Carter (1954)
Kenneth E. Wilson (1954)
William H. Robinson (1954)
J. Horace Gardner (1956)
Elwood Graham (1956)
Floy Clements (1958)
Cecil A. Partee (1957)
Charles F. Armstrong (1957)


Local offices
Oscar Stanton De Priest, Cook County Board of Commissioners (1904–1908), Chicago City Council (1915–1917, 1943–1947)
Louis B. Anderson, Chicago City Council (1923-1933)
William L. Dawson, Chicago City Council (1933-1939)
Earl B. Dickerson, Chicago City Council (1939-1943)
Claude Holman, Chicago City Council (1955-1973)


Indiana


Senate
Robert Brokenburr (1940)


House
Harry H. Richardson (1932)
Robert L. Stanton (1932)
Marshall A. Talley (1932)
James S. Hunter (1940)
Jesse L. Dickinson (1942, 1944)
Wilbur H. Grant (1942)


Kansas


House
W. M. Blount (1929-1930, 1933–1936)
William H. Towers (1937-1939)


Kentucky


House
Charles W. Anderson Jr. (1936), a lawyer in Louisville


Maryland


Senate
Harry A. Cole (1955-1966)


House
Emory Cole (1955)
Truly Hatchett (1955)
Verda Welcome (1958 )
Irma George Dixon (1958 )


Local offices
Walter T. McGuinn, lawyer who served on Baltimore's city council from 1919-1923 and 1927-1931


Massachusetts


House
William H. Lewis (1902)


Michigan


Senate
Charles A. Roxborough (1930)
Charles Diggs Sr. (1937-1944)
Cora Brown (1952)


House
James W. Ames (1901)
Horace A. White (1941)
Charline White (1950)


Local office
William T. Patrick, Detroit City Council (1957-1963)


Missouri


House
Walthall M. Moore (1921)
Edwin F. Kenswil (1943)
William A. Massingale (1947-1948)
Walter V. Lay (1949-1954)
James Troupe Sr. (1954)


Nebraska


Senate, then Unicameral Legislature
John Adams Jr. (1937)


House (prior to 1937)
T. L. Barnett (1924)
A. A. McMillan (1924)
John Andrew Singleton (1927)
Johnny Owen (1933)
John Adams Jr. (1935)


New Jersey


General Assembly
Walter G. Alexander (1920)
Oliver Randolph (1922)
James L. Baxter (1927)
Frank S. Hargrave (1930-1931, 1933–1935, 1937-?, 1938–1942)
J. Mercer Burrell (1933-1937)
Guy R. Moorehead (1937-)
James Otto Hill (1943-1947)
Madaline A. Williams (1957)


New York


Senate
Julius A. Archibald (1953)


State Assembly
Edward A. Johnson (1917)
John C. Hawkins (1919)
Henri W. Shields (1922)
Pope B. Billups (1925)
Lamar Perkins (1930)
Francis E. Rivers (1930)
James E. Stevens (1930)
William T. Andrews (1934)
Robert W. Justice (1935)
Daniel Burrows (1938)
Hulan E. Jack (1940)
William E. Prince (1944)
Bessie A. Buchanan (1955)


Local office
Charles H. Roberts, New York City Board of Aldermen (1920-1921)
George W. Harris, New York City Board of Aldermen (1920-1923)
Adam Clayton Powell Jr., New York City Council (1942-1945)
Benjamin J. Davis Jr., New York City Council (1945-1949)


Ohio


Senate


House
George W. Hayes (1901)
H. T. Eubanks (1904)
A. Lee Beaty (1919)
Henry Higgins (1919)
Harry E. Davis (1921)
E. W. B. Curry (1924)
Perry B. Jackson (1928)
Chester K. Gillespie (1933-1935, 1943–1945)
Richard P. McClain (1934)
David D. Turpeau (1940)
Sandy F. Ray (1942)
Jacob Ashburn Sr. (1944)


Local office
Thomas W. Fleming, Member, Cleveland City Council


Oklahoma


House
A. C. Hamlin (1908)


Pennsylvania


House
Harry W. Bass (1911)
John C. Asbury (1920)
Andrew F. Stephens (1920)
William H. Fuller (1924)
Samuel B. Hart (1924)
Walter E. Tucker (1930)
John William Harris (1932)
Homer S. Brown (1934)
Richard A. Cooper (1934)
Walter K. Jackson (!934)
Hobson R. Reynolds (1935-1936, 1939–1940)
Marshall L. Shephard (1935-1938, 1941–1942)
William A. Allmond (1936)
John H. Brigerman (1937-1938, 1943–1944)
Samuel D. Holmes (1936)
Edwin F. Thompson (1936)
E. Washington Rhodes (1938)
Crystal Bird Fauset (1938)
Ralph T. Jefferson (1940)
Edward C. Young (1940)
Dennie W. Hoggard (1943-1946, 1949–1954)
Lewis M. Mintess (1943-1944, 1947–1952)
Thomas P. Trent (1943-1946, 1950–1951)
Lee P. Myhan (1945-1946)
J. Thompson Pettigrew (1945-1946, 1949–1956)
William A. Upshur (1947-1948)
Garfield B. Harris (1953-1954)
Susie Monroe (1949-1968)


Vermont


House
William J. Anderson (1944)


Washington


House
John H. Ryan (1933)
Charles Stokes


West Virginia


House
James M. Ellis (1902)
Howard Railey (1904)
Ebenezer Howard Harper (1917)
Harry J. Capehart (1919–1925)
Minnie Buckingham Harper (1928, appointed)


Wisconsin


Assembly
Lucian H. Palmer (1906)
Cleveland Moland Colbert (1942), elected but decertified after recount
Leroy J. Simmons (1944)


See also
African American officeholders from the end of the Civil War until before 1900


References

After Murder Park is the third album by British rock band the Auteurs, released in March 1996. The album was recorded at Abbey Road Studios and produced by Steve Albini. In 2014, British independent record label 3 Loop Music re-released the album as a 2CD Expanded Edition which included B-sides, alternate versions, radio session tracks and live recordings.


Recording
After Murder Park was recorded in less than two weeks at Abbey Road Studios, following a year during which frontman Luke Haines had spent most of his time in a wheelchair after jumping off a wall.
Haines had wanted to hire Steve Albini as a producer to achieve a rawer, darker sound than the Auteurs' previous album Now I'm a Cowboy, and to his surprise, the record label agreed. Recording commenced at the end of March 1995, and after only two weeks, the album was recorded and mixed. However, Hut decided to hold back the release for almost a year.


Release and reception

The Back with the Killer EP was issued in January 1996. Following the Kid's Issue EP in May 1996, Haines announced the band's break-up.
The album received mostly decent reviews, entered the British charts at number 53 and sold around 58,000 copies worldwide. During the heyday of Britpop, this was nonetheless seen as a commercial failure. Author Dave Thompson wrote in his book Alternative Rock (2000) that "under Steve Albini's roughshod tutelage, The Auteurs emerge all but unrecognizable – aggressive and angular, but with sufficient melodicism to suggest that whatever else they'd been doing since their last album, ignoring the Beatles wasn't part of it. Ignoring everyone else, however, certainly was." Trouser Press has called the album a "misanthropic mini-masterpiece."


Track listing
All songs written by Luke Haines.

Original CD/LP (CDHUT33/HUTLP33)
"Light Aircraft on Fire" – 2:17
"Child Brides" – 4:26
"Land Lovers" – 2:31
"New Brat in Town" – 3:55
"Everything You Say Will Destroy You" – 2:42
"Unsolved Child Murder" – 2:08
"Married to a Lazy Lover" – 3:55
"Buddha" – 2:52
"Tombstone" – 3:59
"Fear of Flying" – 4:41
"Dead Sea Navigators" – 3:47
"After Murder Park" – 2:00


Personnel
Personnel per album booklet.

The Auteurs
Luke Haines – guitar, Harmonium, vocals
James Banbury – cello, Hammond, korg
Alice Readman – bass guitar
Barny C. Rockford – drums
Additional musicians
Andy Bush – French horn
Marcus Broome – violin
Eleanor Gilchrist – violin
Theresa Whipple – viola
Abigail Trundle – cello
Bern Davis – cello
Production
Steve Albini – recording
Paul Hicks – assistant engineer
Stefan De Batselier – inner photo
Chris Cunningham – treated


Charts


See also
Baader Meinhof – Haines' next project


References
Citations

Sources


External links
After Murder Park at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)

Alkanindiges hongkongensis is a gram-negative, aerobic, nonmotile bacterium of the genus Alkanindiges, which was isolated from the parotid abscess of a patient.


References


External links
Type strain of Alkanindiges hongkongensis at BacDive -  the Bacterial Diversity Metadatabase

Aman Heran is a basketball coach.
Heran co-founded (with Surinder Grewal) the AthElite Basketball Academy where he is a Head Coach. He played at the University of Calgary for two years (where he was co-captain and had a role in the Dinos’ 2004 Canada West Championship win); collegiate basketball in America for three years and De Anza College, San Jose, for another two years.
He runs the girls program at the Athelite Young Basketball Organization (AYBO) league for K-7 and its AAU Spring program for 13-18-year-olds.


Recognition
As a freshman, Aman was named to the Second Team All Coast Conference, averaging 18.7 pts/game. In the 2003-4 Canada West Championship Squad, he was known for his clutch-shooting and tough-defending guard.


References

America is 1976 album by Julio Iglesias. It was released on the Alhambra label. In December 1976, it was No. 2 on the Billboard chart in New York.


Track listing


Charts


Weekly charts


Certifications and sales


References


Sources and external links
Julio Iglesias Discography

Sinosturio schrenckii, the Amur sturgeon, sometimes known as the Japanese sturgeon, is a freshwater species of fish in the sturgeon family. Being able to grow up to a length of 3 meters and weight of 190 kg, this species can be primarily found in its two distinct morphs of grey and brown in the Amur River and Amur Estuary. This sturgeon is a potamodromous migrator, performing their migrations through the Amur river. Due to over-fishing and caviar production, this species is currently listed as critically endangered on the IUCN red list.


Description

Amur sturgeon are massive fish that can grow to a length of 3 meters, and achieve a weight of up to 190 kilograms, though known hybrids between the Amur sturgeon and the kaluga, a much larger species also of genus Sinosturio present in the Amur, can be found with a maximum length of 1.9 meters and a weight of 70 kilograms. Being this size, these fish have 32-47 lateral scutes, 7-9 ventral scutes, and 11-17 dorsal scutes that can be found in two distinct color morphs of grey and brown, with brown morphs being the more rare of the two. Each of their scutes can be found with spines in the center, and of the 11-17 dorsal scutes present the first dorsal scute is the largest. Sinosturio schrenckii shares many traits with other Western Pacific species within its genus, most notably being a large compressed snout, small barbels, multiple dermal skin ossifications covering the body, and a laterodorsal row of scutes. However, the Amur sturgeon lacks a lateroventral band and a fontanel in between the frontal bones that can be found in many species within Sinusturio. This species has very large pectoral fins and a long caudal peduncle that lacks oblique scale rows. The dorsal fins can range from having 38-53 fin rays while the anal fins range from 20 to 32 fin rays.
Hybrids between Amur sturgeon and kaluga are characterized by the presence of intermediate characteristics between the two species and a maximum weight of 1.9 meters and weight of 90 kilograms, these hybrids look different from their parent species to the point of being originally considered a distinct species.


Distribution

The Amur sturgeon is a freshwater fish that has a distribution almost entirely limited to the range of the Amur river, otherwise known as Heilongjang River, and Amur estuary, although a documented catch in Hokkaido, Japan has suggested that this species may make rare anadromous migrations. Within the Amur, Sinosturio schrenckii prefers areas with sandy or rocky bottoms to allow for their bottom feeder lifestyle. In the Amur river Sinosturio schrenckii are most concentrated near the mouth of the river, with the most concentrated region being 100 - 200 kilometers from the mouth. In the Amur estuary, Amur sturgeon can be primarily found in the Western and Northwestern sections, decreasing in abundance as estuary salinity increases. The Amur estuary shows a high frequency of occurrence of Amur sturgeon, with frequencies of 59.5% in 2016 and 65.8% in 2011, although their presence has begun to see declines with 2021 showing a frequency of occurrence of 37.1%.


Life History


Diet

Unlike its neighbor the kaluga, an active fish eating predator, the Amur sturgeon is a benthic feeder that can be found primarily consuming mollusks and small fish. The Amur sturgeon's diet consists of over 90% mollusks, small fish, and crustaceans and the remaining 10% content being insect larvae, oligochaetes, and polychaetes. However, the contents and primary prey changes as Amur sturgeon grow in age and size. Amur sturgeons that are less than 100 centimeters in length will typically eat small fish, most commonly the pond smelt Hypomesus olidus, as their primary source of food. Fish of this species that grow to over 100 centimeters shift over to mollusks as their primary food source, more specifically the mollusk species Japanese corbicule, C. japonica. As Amur sturgeon grow so does the importance of mollusks in their diet, as mollusks have shown an average of 87.6% of food mass in Amur sturgeons.


Breeding
Sinosturio schrenckii are potamodromous migrators, with their spawning migrations being contained in the Amur River system. Two migratory seasons are known to occur where groups of 3-5 sturgeon will migrate from the Amur estuary towards further up the Amur river. The first migratory season takes place during the summer with peaks of sturgeon migrations occurring from 16 to 20 August while the spring migratory season takes place in the spring with peaks occurring from 21 to 25 May, although most spawning migrations will occur during the summer. Males will first spawn at ages 7–8 while females first spawn at ages 9–10, when spawning males will range from lengths of 93–197 cm and weights of 4.0-40.04 kg and females will range from lengths of 95–207 cm and weights of 7.0-71.6 kg. During non-breeding seasons, Amur sturgeon will shift their distributions further downstream of the spawn sites. As the spawning seasons of Amur sturgeon and the kaluga end up in the same time period and locations, hybridization between the two species has been known to occur.


Growth and Development
Amur sturgeon start off their life cycle as free embryos, which then develop into larvae within 7 days to spend their early life in white substrate to allow for easy access of small prey. As the larvae develop, they perform strong migrations downstream the Amur river. After growing to 20mm these larvae will shift their diet towards eating invertebrates until they reach 30 days of age and an average of 42.8 mm to begin metamorphosis into juveniles.
From juvenile life onward, the growth of individuals depends on their location and even their color morph. Groups of Amur sturgeons found in the upper middle of the Amur River have been able to experience higher growth rates than groups that are found in the lower middle river, but sturgeon that are found in the Amur estuary show the highest rates of growth and largest individuals.
Likely as a result of their constrained locations, the brown morphs of Amur sturgeon also have shown to experience lower growth rates than of the grey morphs. When allowed to grow, these fish can eventually reach over 60 years of age with a currently known maximum length of 3 meters and weight of 190 kilograms.


Conservation Status

As of 2022 the Amur sturgeon is currently listed as a critically endangered species on the IUCN Red List and their numbers only continue to lower. This species has been threatened for multiple decades now, primarily as a result of over-fishing and population depletion. This is because the Amur sturgeon and kaluga are the only Acipenseriformes within the Amur river, making their eggs and meat a highly prized commodity and a strong commercial importance for the Chinese caviar industry. Fishing for their species has occurred since the late 1800s, but the industry saw its true peaks in the 1980s with a combined 26 metric tonnes of kaluga and Amur sturgeon caviar being produced alone in 1987. However, due to efforts placed by the Heilongjiang Provincial government, caviar production of this species has lowered to a range of 6.46 to 9.16 metric tonnes per year since 1992.
In an effort to preserve this species, while also allowing for the industry for this fish to continue, the provincial government put efforts to limit the fishing of the Amur sturgeon by lowering the number of issued fishing licenses every year. Other efforts towards preservation of this species include the limitation of fishing periods to January 1 to June 10 and July 21 to the end of the year and limiting the allowed capture size of sturgeon to lengths and weights above 1 meter and 4 kilograms. Both Russia and China have made efforts towards captive breeding and artificial propagation, resulting in 8.45 million Amur sturgeon fry being released into the Amur river by 2005. Though despite these efforts, the Amur sturgeon population has shown to consistently decline in numbers, and reported ages of caught sturgeon have shown to become younger annually.


References


Further reading
Masuda, H., K. Amaoka, C. Araga, T. Uyeno and T. Yoshino (1984). The fishes of the Japanese Archipelago. Vol. 1 (text). Tokai University Press, Tokyo, Japan. 437 p. (text), 370 pls.
Journal Coll. Sci. Imp.Univ.,Tokyo, "23", (7).
Global Biodiversity Information Facility http://data.gbif.org/species/13576254/. Viewed 27 January 2010.

Andreas Schmidt is a Berlin based artist and gallerist.


Biography
Schmidt received a first class Bachelor of Arts  (Photography) degree from Nottingham Trent University, School of Art and Design in 1992, after having moved to England from Germany in 1989. Schmidt's early work consisted mainly of straight analogue photography with a later shift in his art practice from 2008 onward towards appropriation, performance, print-on-demand artist's books and video.


Work
In 2005 German fine art and photography book publisher Hatje Cantz, published his first hard-back monograph Las Vegas to international critical acclaim.
In the accompanying essay, Christoph Ribbat states about Schmidt's photography:  "His work hints at the soberness of the New Topographics, the humor of New Color, the clever objectivity of newer German photo art." Described by J. G. Ballard as "the poet of the hotel corridor", Schmidt's second book, The City was published by Hatje Cantz in 2009 and presents dystopian interior and exterior photographs of London's financial district.
Schmidt was a founding member of ABC Artists' Books Cooperative in early 2009 and left the group in 2014.
His work was shown at the From Here On group show at Les Rencontres d'Arles, Arles in 2011, Fotomuseum Antwerp, Antwerp in 2012 and Arts Santa Monica, Barcelona in 2013 curated by Martin Parr, Joachim Schmid, Joan Fontcuberta, Erik Kessels and Clément Chéroux, showcasing art works by 36 artists (Mishka Henner, Penelope Umbrico, Doug Rickard, Corinne Vionnet, Thomas Mailaender, Willem Popelier, Constant Dullaart, Jon Rafman, etc.) 
The exhibition,  included a large panel triptych by Schmidt called "RGB". 
In 2011, Schmidt's artist book Four Seasons featured in  Photo-Eye's books of the year 2011 list and Schmidt's artist book The Cost of Photobooks: A History Volume II was listed by Le Monde as one of the 10 best photo books of 2011.
On 14 November 2013 Schmidt launched GESAMTBUCHKUNSTWERKSKULPTUR, a custom-made shelving unit containing 77 artist's books at Offprint Paris.
His artist book The Time Machine was included in the group exhibition A History of Photography: Series and Sequences at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London in 2015 which also featured work by Nicholas Nixon, August Sander, Eadweard Muybridge and Lewis Baltz among others.
Schmidt's work is held in a number of private and public collections including the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, UK, FRAC Centre, Orléans, France, Centre Des Livres Artistes, Saint-Yrieix-la-Perche, France, Minnesota Center for Book Arts, Minneapolis, USA. After having lived in London for 22 years, Schmidt moved to Berlin in 2014 and opened Galerie Andreas Schmidt specializing in photography and contemporary art in 2016.


Publications
Camera Austria 45, Vienna, Austria, 1993
Surface – Contemporary Photographic Survey, Booth-Clibborn Editions, United Kingdom, 1996
Eyemazing ‘Built’, Issue 2,  Spring 2004
Las Vegas, (monograph), Hatje Cantz, Germany, 2005
The City,  (monograph), Hatje Cantz, Germany, 2009
Various Small Books Referencing Various Small Books by Ed Ruscha, MIT press, USA, 2013
From Here On, PostPhotography in an Age of Internet and the Mobile Phone, RM/Arts Santa Monica, Spain, 2013
Post-Photography: The Artist with a Camera, Laurence King, United Kingdom, 2014
Ego-Update, Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther Koenig, Germany, 2016.


Exhibitions
2017 Fotofestival Lodz 2017, Lodz, Poland ‘Books to Play with’ (Group)
2015 Ego Update, NRW Duesseldorf, Germany (Group)
2014 Brighton Photo Biennial, Brighton (Group)
2013 Minnesota Center for Book Arts, Directed: The Intersection of Bookart and Film, Minnesota, USA
2013 Centre Des Livres Artistes, Saint-Yrieix-la-Perche, France images / images of images / no images (Group)
2013 Gagosian Gallery, NYC, USA ‘Ed Ruscha Books & Co.’ (Group)
2012 Photographers’ Gallery, London, UK ‘The Animated Gif’ (Group)
2012 The Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio, USA ‘Photographers & Books’ (Group)
2011 Les Rencontres d'Arles, France ‘From Here On’ (Group)
2011 Kunsthalle Schweinfurt, Germany, ‘Parallel Natur’- (Solo with Herbert Mehler)
2008 Goethe Institut, London, UK (Solo)


References

Andy Travis is a fictional character on the television situation comedy WKRP in Cincinnati (1978–82). He was played by Gary Sandy.
Travis was originally intended to be the lead character, the more-or-less normal person who would anchor the series and provide the focus for most of the stories. He is the subject of the theme song, and one critic went so far as to describe Sandy as "Gary Tyler Moore," a nod to Mary Tyler Moore, who played the similar Mary Richards on The Mary Tyler Moore Show and eponymous owner of WKRP producer MTM Enterprises. As the first season went on, WKRP shifted to being more of an ensemble comedy, where any one of the eight regulars could carry an episode. Despite this change, Sandy retained top billing for all four seasons as the straight man to the rest of the cast.


Program director
In the pilot episode, Andy arrives in Cincinnati to take over as WKRP's program director. He previously worked the same job at a radio station in Santa Fe, New Mexico; but he also ran a station in Albuquerque and in Amarillo, Texas. In that episode, he claims to be from Santa Fe and, in the season two episode "Jennifer's Home for Christmas," he refers to Santa Fe as home. However, in the season three episode "A Mile in My Shoes" Andy tells Smilin' Al, a business owner who advertises on WKRP, that he is originally from Phoenix, Arizona. Andy is young, handsome and friendly, and though he is viewed with suspicion by the old guard at the low-rated station—manager Arthur Carlson, sales director Herb Tarlek, and news director Les Nessman—he soon manages to win them over to his side. Mr. Carlson even defends Andy to his domineering mother, the station's owner, when she wants to fire him.
Convinced that he is not going to last at WKRP, Andy spends about the first month in his apartment without furniture, just in case he has to suddenly leave town. In a flashback episode, it is revealed that Andy got his overweight landlady drunk to charm her into letting him out of his lease, which he does successfully.
Described by Mr. Carlson as a "cowboy", Andy frequently wears boots and a cowboy hat. He also wears very tight jeans to work, which makes Mr. Carlson uncomfortable. "With denim," Andy explains, "I feel comfortable and relaxed. I feel as though I can work better." He wears his hair in the late 1970s "feathered" style, and many of the characters make fun of his abundant hair: Bailey Quarters, asking him to take part in a promotion, asks him to imagine "Your hair flowing in the wind -- now, that stuff will flow!" Though he is usually quiet and low-key, describing himself as "an easy-going guy with a natural ability to lead," he can sometimes lose his temper when his employees will not listen to him, which is more often than not. In response to Johnny Fever's refusal to play his playlist of top 40 hits, Andy jokingly threatens to shoot himself. In fact, a common joke in the series is that Andy often has to literally run to the broadcast booth to stop some unacceptable material being broadcast at that moment.
Andy's first act at WKRP is to change the format from "beautiful music" to top 40 rock n' roll. He has, in his own words, "lived and breathed radio ever since I was a little boy," and his ambition is to turn WKRP around and make it a top-rated station. But he is unable to do what it would really take to improve the station: fire Herb and Les. He has come to feel affection for them, and he also knows a real housecleaning at the station would entail getting rid of Mr. Carlson too.
After his first year on the job, when WKRP only rises from 16th to 14th in an 18-station market, and while the rest of the staff is elated, Andy, though outwardly happy, is furious, and considers it a personal failure. After a conversation with his friend, nighttime disc jockey Gordon "Venus Flytrap" Sims, Andy realizes that he cannot leave WKRP or fire anybody. He likes the people too much, and has made friends here, something that did not happen at the other stations where he worked. Andy decides to abandon his ambition of becoming a hugely successful program director, or as Venus puts it, "You gave up a chance to be Boy Wonder of American radio to be the head guard of a nut farm."
As the series goes on, Andy turns his attention to fighting against the increasingly bland, corporate world of modern radio. In one episode, he meets Norris Breeze (played by thirtysomething co-star David Clennon), a former colleague of his from New Mexico who is now a successful programming consultant. Breeze is appalled by Andy's decision to let the DJs pick the music they like instead of just playing the same songs over and over, like most radio stations. "Nobody is programming their own music," Breeze says. "We are, and that's the way it's going to stay," Andy replies.
A story arc from the final season of WKRP has Andy working behind the scenes to get Mama Carlson to put more money into the station, so that he can improve the place and give the employees raises. When the staff considers unionizing, he strikes a deal with her: he will keep the union out of the station if she will pay higher salaries and allow him to renovate the station's lobby. The others never find out what Andy did.
Also in the final season, Andy takes Mama Carlson out to dinner and the opera, hoping to get her to invest still more money (this time to buy a new transmitter). He begins to wonder if she expects him to sleep with her in exchange for the money. In the end, it turns out that she only wanted to go out with a personable young man on her arm, though she enjoyed allowing him to believe that she had other expectations.
In the final episode, Andy is given his walking papers when Mrs. Carlson announces her plans to change the station's format from Top 40 to all news, despite the station's most recent finish in sixth place in the Cincinnati radio ratings, with the morning show at number one. She reverses her decision after Johnny, who has learned her ulterior motive of changing the format to doom the station to failure like she wants (in order to keep the station as a tax write-off for her other business ventures), threatens to divulge her motive to her son. Just as Mrs. Carlson tells Arthur that she's reconsidered changing the format, a drunken Andy and Venus burst into her home with the intent of telling her off. "Mrs. Carlson...I'm tired of your crud!" Both collapse on her floor.
Between the end of WKRP in Cincinnati in 1982 and the start of The New WKRP in Cincinnati in 1991, he leaves the station. The station's fortunes fall dramatically after his departure, to the point that by the time of The New WKRP in Cincinnati, the station is back in the same position as it was before he arrived. His (apparently) first replacement, Steve DeMarco (an unseen character), is much more controversial, embroiling the station in scandal and committing a major FCC violation that leads to his firing (and Carlson's arrest) the day before the new series begins. By the time of the later series, the program director's chair is filled by Donovan Aderhold (played by Mykelti Williamson), who disappears in the penultimate episode when he leaves the station, attempts to return, but has his plane disappear. The position is empty in the series finale. Andy Travis was one of two main cast members from the original series, along with Bailey Quarters, that never appeared in the new series. Sandy had grown frustrated that the role had typecast him as a handsome but lightweight leading man and had left television shortly after the original series ended in order to work on stage.


Personal life
In the first-season episode "Love Returns", Travis is very tempted to leave WKRP. An old flame, now a very successful country and western singer (played by It's a Living star Barrie Youngfellow), shows up and rekindles old feelings. She offers him a job with her entourage, but he reluctantly turns it down. During the remainder of the show's run, Andy occasionally refers to having girlfriends and dates, and even uses Mr. Carlson's office to impress an attractive coat-check girl during a business party, but otherwise he is not actually seen actively pursuing a love interest.
Andy is not immune to the charms of his female co-workers. After Andy is knocked unconscious during a tornado, Jennifer Marlowe begins giving him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, which a delirious Andy soon attempts to turn into a passionate kiss. Similarly, when reprimanding Bailey Quarters for crafting a fake news story that was subsequently read on-air, he informs her that should it ever happen again, she will be "the best-looking reporter on the unemployment line" (Bailey's response in turn is non-verbal, but does indicate that she is extremely flattered by the compliment). In the episode "Filthy Pictures", Bailey uses Andy's obvious discomfort at being asked to pose in a bathing suit (for a charity photoshoot) to gently mock male chauvinist attitudes, greeting him with "Hey, baby" and calling him "beefcake". However, Andy does get his own back when Bailey dresses stylishly in purple and pretends to be a former nude pinup model (in order to get nude photos of Jennifer back from a sleazy photographer); when she returns to the station after the successful ruse, Andy greets her by saying, "Hey, baby...purple's my favorite color." He then begins chasing her around the station.


Casting
Hugh Wilson, the creator and showrunner of WKRP, originally wanted to offer the part of Andy to David Letterman. However, MTM decided to cast Letterman in another show, Mary Tyler Moore's comedy-variety show Mary (which was canceled after only three weeks). Several other actors were considered for the part, including Ross Bickell (who would recommend his then-wife Loni Anderson for the part of Jennifer Marlowe), but CBS executives decided that Sandy was the best choice. Sandy recalled that his audition involved performing a scene with Gordon Jump, who had already been cast as Arthur Carlson; both Jump and Sandy were originally from Dayton, Ohio, and Jump was already familiar with Sandy—he had edited a publication in which a younger Sandy had been highlighted as a promising youth. Years after the series ended, Sandy was offered the audition reel that featured the other performers who auditioned for the part; upon reviewing it, he was glad he got the part because he felt his audition was the best, an assessment that Jump shared.


References

An angel is a spiritual, heavenly, or supernatural entity, often depicted as humanoid with bird-like wings, frequently in the role as a messenger or intermediary between God (the transcendent) and humanity (the profane) in various traditions like the Abrahamic religions. Other roles include protectors and guides for humans, such as guardian angels, and servants of God. In Western belief-systems the term is often used to distinguish benevolent from malevolent intermediary beings. 
Emphasizing the distance between God and mankind, revelation-based belief-systems require angels to bridge the gap between the earthly and the transcendent realm. Angels play a lesser role in monistic belief-systems, since the gap is non-existent. However, angelic beings might be conceived as aids to achieve a proper relationship with the divine.
Abrahamic religions describe angelic hierarchies, which vary by religion and sect. Some angels are indicated with names (such as Gabriel or Michael) or are of a specific kind or rank (such as a seraph or an archangel). Malevolent angels are often believed to have been expelled from heaven and are called fallen angels. In many such religions, the devil (or devils) is identified with such angels.

Angels in art are often identified with bird wings, halos, and divine light. They are usually shaped like humans of extraordinary beauty, though this is not always the case – sometimes, they are portrayed as being frightening or inhuman.


Etymology, names

The word angel arrives in modern English from Old English engel (with a hard g) and the Old French angele. Both of these derive from Late Latin angelus, which in turn was borrowed from Late Greek ἄγγελος angelos (literally "messenger"). Τhe word's earliest form is Mycenaean a-ke-ro, attested in Linear B syllabic script. According to the Dutch linguist R. S. P. Beekes, ángelos itself may be "an Oriental loan, like ἄγγαρος (ángaros, 'Persian mounted courier')."
The rendering of ángelos is the Septuagint's default translation of the Biblical Hebrew term malʼākh, denoting simply "messenger" without connoting its nature. In the Latin Vulgate, this meaning becomes bifurcated: when malʼākh or ángelos is supposed to denote a human messenger, words like nuntius or legatus are applied. If the word refers to some supernatural being, the word angelus appears. Such differentiation has been taken over by later vernacular translations of the Bible, early Christian and Jewish exegetes and eventually modern scholars.


Background
The concept of angels is historically best to be understood from different ideas of the concept of God throughout history. In polytheistic and animistic worldviews, supernatural powers (i.e. deities, spirits, daemons, etc.) were assigned to different natural phenomena. Within a monotheistic framework, these powers were reconsidered to be servants of the supreme deity, turning autonomous supernatural beings into "angels".
By that, supernatural powers controlling or influencing humanity's perception of the world, including natural phenomena and humans, are ultimately under control of a supreme God. Prominent angels, such as Michael and Gabriel, reflect a connection to the Chief Semitic deity El. Even "bad" angels such as Satan, Samael, Iblis etc., can be understood as an operating force within the nature of humans, as responsible for selfish tendencies.
The idea of angels in early Hebrew scripture as supernatural agents is absent. Instead, the Hebrew deity intervenes in human affairs, mostly by means of punishment. Only in later thought of post-exilic and prophetic writings, the Biblical deity is conceptualized as distant and more merciful, his interventions replaced by the idea of angels. However, such angels still carry out the gruesome attributes of God and can be both benevolent and malevolent. The notion of angels as embodiment of good emerges only under influence of Zoroastrianism, in which the Devil is conceived as the principle of evil, with a hosts of demons, in battle with the holy entities (Aməša Spəṇta) created by Ahura Mazda (principle of good).
The influence of dualistic tendencies and replacement of divine powers by angels is evident in the Qumram writings. In the Angelic Liturgy, the Hebrew term elim (deities, heavenly powers) is used for angelic beings and not for God. The War Scroll speaks about angels of light fighting against demonic beings of darkness.


Zoroastrianism

In Zoroastrianism there are different angel-like figures. They patronize human beings and other creatures, and also manifest God's energy.
The Amesha Spentas, although rather emanations of Ahura Mazda ("Wise Lord", God) than distinct messengers, have often been compared to angels. Similar to angels in Abrahamic tradition, Vohu Manah reveals to Zoroaster the true nature of God.
Additionally to the Amesha Spentas, the Fravashi have often been compared to angels, functioning as a guardian angel, and have been adopted as such by Zoroastrians themselves since the 19th century. Unlike the Amesha Spentas, the Fravashi appear as individualized warriors of Ahura Mazda's celestial army, descending from heaven to aid those who summon them against demons.


Judaism

In Judaism, angels (Hebrew: מַלְאָךְ mal'āḵ; "messenger"), are understood through interpretation of the Tanakh and in a long tradition as supernatural beings who stand by God in heaven, but are strictly to be distinguished from God and are subordinate to him. Occasionally, they can show selected people God's will and instructions. In the Jewish tradition they are also inferior to humans since they have no will of their own and are able to carry out only one divine command.


Hebrew Bible

The Torah uses the Hebrew terms מלאך אלהים (mal'āk̠ 'ĕlōhîm; "messenger of God"), מלאך יהוה (mal'āk̠ Yahweh; "messenger of the Lord"), בני אלהים (bənē 'ĕlōhîm; "sons of God") and הקודשים (haqqôd̠əšîm; "the holy ones") to refer to beings traditionally interpreted as angels.
The term 'מלאך' ('mal'āk̠') is also used in other books of the Hebrew Bible. In the early stages of Hebrew writings, the term refers to human messengers, not to supernatural entities. A human messenger might be a prophet or priest, such as Malachi, "my messenger"; the Greek superscription in the Septuagint translation states the Book of Malachi was written "by the hand of his messenger" ἀγγέλου (angélu). Examples of a supernatural messenger are the "Malak YHWH", who is either a messenger from God, an aspect of God (such as the logos), or God himself as the messenger (the "theophanic angel.")
In the early writings of the Hebrew Bible, both Hebrew: בְנֵי־הָאֱלֹהִים, romanized: Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm, lit. 'Sons of Gods' as well as the Hebrew: מַלְאָךְ, romanized: mal’āḵ, lit. 'messenger' are aspects of God. In the earliest records, the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm are in heaven. They are depicted as the heavenly court or the pantheon of religious belief-system of their time. They reflect the transcendent aspect of the Divine, but become progressively differentiated from the good aspect of the Divine. The mal’āḵ on the other hand, expresses the Divinties' interaction with the world. As such the mal’āḵ functions as the voice of the Divine, the Divine spirit, or as God himself. In Exodus 3:2–4, it is both Yahweh as well as a mal’āḵ by which Moses is addressed. The fusion of the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm with the mal’āḵ is evident in the Book of Hiob. Here, Satan is both one of the Bənē hāʾĔlōhīm in the heavenly court, as well as a mal’āḵ expressing God's interaction with humanity.
Michael D. Coogan notes that it is only in the late books that the terms "come to mean the benevolent semi-divine beings familiar from later mythology and art." Daniel is the biblical book to refer to individual angels by name, mentioning Gabriel in Daniel 9:21 and Michael in Daniel 10:13. These angels are part of Daniel's apocalyptic visions and are an important part of apocalyptic literature.
In Daniel 7, Daniel receives a dream-vision from God. [...] As Daniel watches, the Ancient of Days takes his seat on the throne of heaven and sits in judgement in the midst of the heavenly court [...] an [angel] like a son of man approaches the Ancient One in the clouds of heaven and is given everlasting kingship. Jeffrey Burton Russel writes that "the more the banim and the mal'ak were seen as distinct from the God, the more it was possible to thrust upon the evil elements in the divine character that Yahweh had discarded.".
Coogan explains the development of this concept of angels: "In the postexilic period, with the development of explicit monotheism, these divine beings—the 'sons of God' who were members of the Divine Council—were in effect demoted to what are now known as 'angels', understood as beings created by God, but immortal and thus superior to humans." This conception of angels is best understood in contrast to demons and is often thought to be "influenced by the ancient Persian religious tradition of Zoroastrianism, which viewed the world as a battleground between forces of good and forces of evil, between light and darkness." One of these is hāššāṭān, a figure depicted in (among other places) the Book of Job.


Rabbinic Judaism
Rabbinic Judaism has been an orthodox form of Judaism since the 6th century CE, after the codification of the Babylonian Talmud. In post-Biblical Judaism, certain angels took on particular significance and developed unique personalities and roles. According to Rabbinic Judaism, the angels have no bodies, but are eternally living creatures created out of fire. The Babylonian Talmud reads as "The Torah was not given to ministering angels." (לא נתנה תורה למלאכי השרת) usually understood as a concession to human's imperfection, in contrast to the angels. Thus, they occasionally appear in Midrashim as competition with humans. 
The angels as heavenly beings, strictly following the laws of God, become jealous of God's affection for man. Humans, by following the Torah, in prayer, by resisting evil instincts (yetzer hara) and by teshuva, are preferred to the flawless angels. As a result, they are also inferior to humans in the Jewish tradition. In the Midrash, the plural of El (Elohim) used in Genesis in relation to the creation of human beings is explained by the presence of angels: God therefore consulted with the angels, but made the final decision alone. This story serves as an example, teaching that the powerful should also consult with the weak. God's own final decision highlights God's undisputable omnipotence.
Although archangels were believed to rank among the heavenly host, no systematic hierarchy ever developed. Metatron is considered one of the highest of the angels in Merkabah and Kabbalah mysticism and often serves as a scribe; he is briefly mentioned in the Talmud and figures prominently in Merkabah mystical texts. Michael, who serves as a warrior and advocate for Israel (Daniel 10:13), is looked upon particularly fondly. Gabriel is mentioned in the Book of Daniel (Daniel 8:15–17) and briefly in the Talmud, as well as in many Merkabah mystical texts. There is no evidence in Judaism for the worship of angels, but there is evidence for the invocation and sometimes even conjuration of angels.
Philo of Alexandria identifies the angel with the Logos inasmuch as the angel is the immaterial voice of God. The angel is something different from God himself, but is conceived as God's instrument.

Four classes of ministering angels minister and utter praise before the Holy One, blessed be He: the first camp (led by) Michael on His right, the second camp (led by) Gabriel on His left, the third camp (led by) Uriel before Him, and the fourth camp (led by) Raphael behind Him; and the Shekhinah of the Holy One, blessed be He, is in the centre. He is sitting on a throne high and exaltedBill Rebiger wrote that the naming of angels are a post-exilic phenomenon, and before they are anonymous messengers, protectors and accusers. He also highlighted rabbinical traditions such as Yerushalmi Rosh Hashanah 56d, which states: "Even the names of the angels came up with them from Babylon. At first it is written ‘then one of the seraphim flew to me’ (Isaiah 6:6), and ‘seraphim stood above Him’ (Isaiah 6:2). But from then on it is written ‘the man Gabriel’ (Daniel 9:21), and ‘Michael your prince’ (Daniel 10:21)."


Later interpretations
According to Kabbalah, there are four worlds and our world is the last world: the world of action (Assiyah). Angels exist in the worlds above as a 'task' of God. They are an extension of God to produce effects in this world. After an angel has completed its task, it ceases to exist. The angel is in effect the task. This is derived from the book of Genesis when Abraham meets with three angels and Lot meets with two. The task of one of the angels was to inform Sara and Abraham of their coming child. The other two were to save Lot and to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah.

Jewish philosopher Maimonides explained his view of angels in his Guide for the Perplexed II:4 and II.

... This leads Aristotle in turn to the demonstrated fact that God, glory and majesty to Him, does not do things by direct contact. God burns things by means of fire; fire is moved by the motion of the sphere; the sphere is moved by means of a disembodied intellect, these intellects being the 'angels which are near to Him', through whose mediation the spheres move ... thus totally disembodied minds exist which emanate from God and are the intermediaries between God and all the bodies [objects] here in this world.Maimonides had a neo-Aristotelian interpretation of the Bible. Maimonides writes that to the wise man, one sees that what the Bible and Talmud refer to as "angels" are actually allusions to the various laws of nature; they are the principles by which the physical universe operates.For all forces are angels! How blind, how perniciously blind are the naive?! If you told someone who purports to be a sage of Israel that the Deity sends an angel who enters a woman's womb and there forms an embryo, he would think this a miracle and accept it as a mark of the majesty and power of the Deity, despite the fact that he believes an angel to be a body of fire one third the size of the entire world. All this, he thinks, is possible for God. But if you tell him that God placed in the sperm the power of forming and demarcating these organs, and that this is the angel, or that all forms are produced by the Active Intellect; that here is the angel, the "vice-regent of the world" constantly mentioned by the sages, then he will recoil. – Guide for the Perplexed II:4


Christianity

The Medieval Christian concept of angels derives from Hebrew and Greek scriptures. In the Bible, angels are anthropomorphized intermediaries between God and humanity. Some angels appear to be impersonal forces of the divine will, while others have individual names and personalities.
In the formative stage, the Christian concept of an angel characterized the angel as a 'messenger' of God. The word "angel" can be drawn to the term or role of a "messenger" throughout the Bible in both old and new testaments – (Hebrews 1:14) calls them "ministering [or serving] spirits", sent by God to aid the "heirs of salvation". Later came identification of individual angelic messengers: Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, and Uriel. Then, in the space of slightly over two centuries (from the 3rd to the 5th) the image of angels took on definite characteristics both in theology and in art. Ellen Muehlberger has argued that in Late Antiquity, angels were conceived of as one type of being among many, whose primary purpose was to guard and to guide Christians.
In systematic Christian theology, angels are imagined as incorporeal entities and in opposition to corporeal humans, as in the writings of Origen and Thomas Aquinas.


Bible

Angels are represented throughout Bibles as spiritual beings which are intermediate between God and humanity: "For thou hast made him [man] a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour" (Psalms 8:4–5). Christians, based on Psalms and Genesis 2:1, believe that angels were the first beings created by God before the creation of Earth (Psalms 148:2–5; Colossians 1:16). Greek translations of the Hebrew Bible refer to intermediary beings as angels, instead of daimons, thus giving raise to a distinction between demons and angels. In the Old Testament, both benevolent and fierce angels are mentioned, but never called demons. The symmetry lies between angels sent by God, and intermediary spirits of foreign deities, not in good and evil deeds.
In the New Testament, the existence of angels, just like that of demons, is taken for granted. They can intervene and intercede on behalf of humans. Angels protect the righteous (Matthew 4:6, Luke 4:11). They dwell in the heavens (Matthew 28:2, John 1:51), act as God's warriors (Matthew 26:53) and worship God (Luke 2:13). In the parable of the Rich man and Lazarus, angels behave as psychopomps (Luke 16:22). The Resurrection of Jesus features angels, telling the woman that Jesus is no longer in the tomb, but has risen from the dead. Angels don't marry (Matthew 22:30, Mark 12:25, and Luke 20:34–46).
Paul the Apostle acknowledges good (2 Cor 11:14; Gal 1:8; 4:14) and evil angels in his writings. According to 1 Corinthians 6:3, angels will be judged by God, implying that angels can be both good and evil. Some scholars suggest that Gal 3:19 means that the Law of Moses was introduced by angels rather than God, combined with his statements in Galatians, implies a negative role. In Colossians 2:18, Paul criticizes the worship of angels.


Interaction with humans

Forget not to show love unto strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares.—Hebrews 13:2
Three separate cases of angelic interaction deal with the births of John the Baptist and Jesus. In (Luke 1:11), an angel appears to Zechariah to inform him that he will have a child despite his old age, thus proclaiming the birth of John the Baptist. In Luke 1:26, Gabriel visits Mary in the Annunciation to foretell the birth of Jesus. Angels proclaim the birth of Jesus in the Adoration of the shepherds in Luke 2:10.
According to Matthew 4:11, after Jesus spent 40 days in the desert, "...the Devil left him and, behold, angels came and ministered to him." In Luke 22:43 an angel comforts Jesus during the Agony in the Garden. In Matthew 28:5 an angel speaks at the empty tomb, following the Resurrection of Jesus and the rolling back of the stone by angels.
In 1851 Pope Pius IX approved the Chaplet of Saint Michael based on the 1751 reported private revelation from archangel Michael to the Carmelite nun Antonia d'Astonac. In a biography of Gemma Galgani written by Germanus Ruoppolo, Galgani stated that she had spoken with her guardian angel.

Pope John Paul II emphasized the role of angels in Catholic teachings in his 1986 address titled "Angels Participate In History Of Salvation", in which he suggested that modern mentality should come to see the importance of angels.
According to the Vatican's Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, "The practice of assigning names to the Holy Angels should be discouraged, except in the cases of Gabriel, Raphael and Michael whose names are contained in Holy Scripture."


Theology

By the late 4th century, the Church Fathers agreed that there were different categories of angels, with appropriate missions and activities assigned to them. There was, however, some disagreement regarding the nature of angels. Some argued that angels had physical bodies, while some maintained that they were entirely spiritual. Some theologians had proposed that angels were not divine but on the level of immaterial beings subordinate to the Trinity. The resolution of this Trinitarian dispute included the development of doctrine about angels.
According to Augustine of Hippo, the term 'angel' refers to "the name of their office, not [...] their nature", as they are pure spirits who act as messengers, clarifying: "If you seek the name of their nature, it is 'spirit'; if you seek the name of their office, it is 'angel': from what they are, 'spirit', from what they do, 'angel'." Gregory of Nazianzus thought that angels were made as "spirits" and "flames of fire", following Hebrews 1, and that they can be identified with the "thrones, dominions, rulers and authorities" of Colossians 1.
Forty Gospel Homilies by Pope Gregory I (c. 540 – 12 March 604) noted angels and archangels. The Fourth Lateran Council's (1215) Firmiter credimus decree (issued against the Albigenses) declared that the angels were created beings and that men were created after them. The First Vatican Council (1869) repeated this declaration in Dei Filius, the "Dogmatic constitution on the Catholic faith".
In the Middle Ages, theologians had to address Augustine's ideas of "angelic knowledge", as set out in De Genesi ad litteram, which he divided into "morning" knowledge, knowledge of Creation before it is created derived from direct access to the Word of God, and "evening" knowledge, knowledge of Creation derived from perceiving it after it has been created. Thomas Aquinas (13th century) related angels to Aristotle's metaphysics in his Summa contra Gentiles, Summa Theologica, the 8th question of Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate, and in De substantiis separatis, a treatise on angelology.
Aquinas varied significantly from the Augustinian view in two major respects: angels were not created in an initial state of bliss, and only beatified angels have "morning" knowledge. In other words: angels have an angelic nature, but in their natural states have no access to Divine "morning" knowledge of Creation, which they only gain with supernatural assistance. This was Aquinas' most original contribution to Christian angelology. Although angels have greater knowledge than men, they are not omniscient, as Matthew 24:36 points out.
According to the Summa Theologica, angels were created instantaneously by God in a state of grace in the Empyrean Heaven (LXI. 4) at the same time when he created all the contents of the corporeal world (LXI. 3). They are pure spirits whose life consists in knowledge and love. Being bodiless, their knowledge is intellectual and not through senses (LIV. 5). Differently from humans, their knowledge is not acquired from the exterior world (having acquired all knowledge they would ever receive in the moment of their creation); moreover they attain to the truth of a thing at a single glance without need of reasoning (LV. a; LVIII. 3,4). They know all that passes in the external world (LV. 2) and the totality of creatures, but they do not know human secret thoughts that depends on human free will and thereby are not necessarily linked with external events (LVII. 4). They do not know the future unless God reveals it to them (LVII. 3).
According to Aquinas, angels are the closest creatures to God. Therefore, like God, they are constituted by pure form without matter. While they do not have a physical composition of matter and form (called hylomorphism), they possess the metaphysical composition of act (the act of being) and potency (their finite essence, yet without being). Each angel is a species to which a unique individual belongs; angels differ one from another by way of their unique and irrepetible form. In other words, form – and not matter – is their principle of individuation.


Islam

Belief in angels is fundamental to Islam. The Quranic word for angel (Arabic: ملاك Malāk) derives either from Malaka, meaning "he controlled", due to their power to govern different affairs assigned to them, or from the root either from ʼ-l-k, l-ʼ-k or m-l-k with the broad meaning of a "messenger", just like its counterparts in Hebrew (malʾákh) and Greek (angelos). Unlike their Hebrew counterpart, the term is exclusively used for heavenly spirits of the divine world, but not for human messengers. The Quran refers to both angelic and human messengers as "rasul" instead. 
The Quran is the principal source for the Islamic concept of angels. Some of them, such as Gabriel and Michael, are mentioned by name in the Quran, others are only referred to by their function. Most Muslim theologians, such as al-Suyuti, based on a hadith stating that the angels have been created through light (nūr) or fire (nār), depict angels as entities consisting of substance, in contrast to philosophers who argued for angels being disembodied spirits. Additionally, angels are thought to be endowed with reason and be subject to God's tests. Al-Maturidi (853–944 CE) states that the inhabitants of heaven were tested by adornments, just as humans and jinn on earth were tested, pointing at Sūrat al-Kahf [Q. 18:7]. When angels fail their tests, they might end up on earth, such as Harut and Marut. If the devils (šayāṭīn) have been angels once or form a separate type of creature from the beginning, is discussed in Islamic tradition. Contrary to popular belief, angels are never described as agents of revelation in the Quran, although interpretation credits Gabriel with that. Angels are not limited to benevolent tasks, but can also carry out grim orders. Not demons, but angels are tasked to guard and punish sinners in hell.
Angels play a significant role in Mi'raj literature, where Muhammad encounters several angels during his journey through the heavens. Further angels have often been featured in Islamic eschatology, Islamic theology and Islamic philosophy. Individual angels are further evoked in exorcism rites, with their names engraved in talismans or amulets to call upon their powers.


Theology (Kalām)


Classical period

Islamic theology usually distinguishes between three types of invisible creatures: angels (malāʾikah), djinn, and devils (šayāṭīn). Islamic theologian al-Ghazali (c. 1058–1111) divides human nature into four domains, each representing another type of creature: animals, beasts, devils and angels. Reconciling the literal meaning (Ẓāhir) with the Avicennan cosmology of falsafa of angels, he identified angels with the "celestial intellects" or "immaterial souls". Angels, made from light (Nūr) and thus associated with reason ('aql), represent the intellectual capacity of a human and the ability to bound the devilish qualities from within. By that, Ghazali does not deny the literal reality of angels, but rejects that they could be perceived directly.
Although belief in angels remains one of Six Articles of Faith in Islam, one can not find a dogmatic angelology in Islamic tradition. However, theologians generally distinguish between the angels in heaven (karubiyin), fully absorbed in the ma'rifa (knowledge) of God, and the messengers (rasūl) who carry out divine decrees between heaven and earth. Others add a third group of angels, and categorize angels into İlliyyûn Mukarrebûn (those around God's throne), Mudabbirât (carrying the laws of nature), and Rasūl (messengers). Al-Baydawi based this divide into two groups on Quranic verses: angels who are self-immersed in knowledge of "the Truth" (al-Haqq), based on "they laud night and day, they never wane" (21:29), they are the "highmost" and "angels brought near" and those who are the executors of commands, based on "they do not disobey Allah in what He commanded them but they do what they are commanded" (66:6), who are the administers of the command of heaven to earth.


Modern and Contemporary movements
Some modern scholars have emphasized a metaphorical reinterpretation of the concept of angels.
Salafism and Wahhabism generally emphasize a literal interpretation of angels against modernistic interpretations, as for example, suggested by Nasr Abu Zayd. Simultaneously, many traditional materials regarding angels accepted during the Classical period are often disregarded by Wahhabis and Salafis. The Muslim Brotherhood scholars Sayyid Qutb and Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar reject much established material from earlier periods, for example, the story of Harut and Marut or calling the Angel of Death Azrail. Sulayman Ashqar not only rejects the traditional material itself, but also disapproves of previous scholars who used such reports.


Iconography

In Islam, just like in Judaism and Christianity, angels are often represented in anthropomorphic forms combined with supernatural images, such as wings, being of great size or wearing heavenly articles. The Quran describes them as "messengers with wings—two, or three, or four: He [God] adds to Creation as He pleases..." The 13th century book Ajā'ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā'ib al-mawjūdāt (The Wonders of Creation) by Zakariya al-Qazwini describes Islamic angelology, and is often illustrated with many images of angels. The angels are typically depicted with bright, vivid colors, giving them unusual liveliness and other-worldly translucence. While some angels are referred to as "Guardians of the Kingdom of God," others are associated with hell. An undated manuscript of The Wonders of Creation from the Bavarian State Library in Munich includes depictions of angels both alone and alongside humans and animals. Angels are also illustrated in Timurid and Ottoman manuscripts, such as The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad's Ascension (Mir'ajnama) and the Siyer-i Nebi.


Baháʼí faith
In his Kitáb-i-Íqán Baháʼu'lláh, founder of the Baháʼí Faith, describes angels as people who "have consumed, with the fire of the love of God, all human traits and limitations", and have "clothed themselves" with angelic attributes and have become "endowed with the attributes of the spiritual". ʻAbdu'l-Bahá describes angels as the "confirmations of God and His celestial powers" and as "blessed beings who have severed all ties with this nether world" and "been released from the chains of self", and "revealers of God's abounding grace". The Baháʼí writings also refer to the Concourse on High, an angelic host, and the Maid of Heaven of Baháʼu'lláh's vision.

I raised my hand another time, and bared one of Her breasts that had been hidden beneath Her gown. Then the firmament was illumined by the radiance of its light, contingent beings were made resplendent by its appearance and effulgence, and by its rays, infinite numbers of suns dawned forth, as though they trekked through heavens that were without beginning or end. I became bewildered at the pen of God's handiwork, and at what it had inscribed upon Her temple. It was as though She had appeared with a body of light in the forms of the spirit, as though She moved upon the earth of essence in the substance of manifestation. I noticed that the houris had poked their heads out of their rooms and were suspended in the air above Her. They grew perplexed at Her appearance and Her beauty and were entranced by the raptures of Her song. Praise be to Her creator, fashioner, and maker--to the one Who made Her manifest.
Then she nearly swooned within herself, and with all her being she sought to inhale My fragrance. She opened Her lips, and the rays of light dawned forth from Her teeth, as though the pearls of the cause had appeared from Her treasures and Her shells.
She asked, "Who art Thou?"

I said, "A servant of God and the son of his maidservant."


Philosophy


Ethics
Western Christian philosophy utlized angels as a thought experiment about moral decision making. Angels, as purely spiritual beings, served as an example on how someone makes decisions during optimal psychological and cognitive conditions. The voluntarist account maintains that choices are based on free-will and that angels either stayed in heaven or fell by their own volution. While the intellectualists need to explain how a spiritual being can suffer from cognitive deficiencies, voluntarists need to explain how beings under the same psychological conditions make different moral choices. Henry of Ghent (c. 1217 – 29 June 1293) asserts that evil volition must precede mistaken consideration. Defective reasoning is described as the result of evil will. Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225 – 7 March 1274), following an intellectualist approach, argued that the mind cannot comprehend all thoughts at once. As such, angels only consider on whatever they focus on, but if they do not focus on the highest good, they commit evil actions. Therefore, decisions are based on intellectual capacity rather than free-will.
Muslim theologian Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149 or 1150–1209) demonstrated his virtue ethics on the famous discussion as whether angels or prophets are more noble. While proposing a voluntarist theory earlier, which regarded voluntary actions of humans higher than obedience of angels, his later theories argue for the superiority of angels. Following the Falsafiyya and Mu'tazila, al-Razi describes angels as morally perfect beings. He argued that angels are perfect in power and knowledge and thus, there is no obstacle in their moral perfection, whereas humans suffer from physical limitations and cannot obtain moral excellence. Giving priority of essence and attributes over effort and actions, al-Razi constructs a virtue ethic in contrast to the consequentialist ethics more prevailing among his contemporaries.


Metaphysics
In Ancient Greek philosophy, there is no significant distinction made between good and evil spirits. Under Iranian influence, the sublunary sphere was traced to inspiring angels. Philo of Alexandria already identified the Neo-Platonic interpretation of daemons as angels. The daemons were thought to be intermediary between the supernatural and earthly realm, interpreted by Philo as the Greek term for angels.
In the commentaries of Proclus (4th century) on the Timaeus of Plato, Proclus uses the terminology of "angelic" (aggelikos) and "angel" (aggelos) in relation to metaphysical beings. According to Aristotle, just as there is a Prime Mover, so too, must there be spiritual secondary movers.
Ibn Sina, developed an angelological hierarchy of Intellects, which are created by "the One" (God). Accordingly, the first creation by God is the supreme intellect. From that intellect, intermediary spirits (angels) emanate. From these intellects, the intellect corresponding to the soul finally emerges. It is by the last Intellect that matter is animated and illuminates the mind.
Materialism removed angels from philosophical and scientific consideration. Thomas Hobbes declared angels to be "accidences of the brain" without any external reality. Immanuel Kant’s critique of knowledge further diminished the rational justification for angels.
In modern times, Lewis White Beck discerned the presence of a contemporary equivalent to ancient angelology and demonology within the context of the perpetual scientific search for extraterrestrial life. In Beck's view, the tales of benevolent and malevolent extraterrestrial beings which are enshrined within ancient myths, religious traditions and contemporary science-fiction serve as insightful commentaries on the human condition. Beck argues that along with our counterparts from ancient times, humanity is, "now suffering from technological shock, destroying by radiological and chemical, if not moral, pollution the only abode of life we know." Within the context of the anxiety derived from such uncertainty, modern man now searches for an eschatological form of renewed hope and consolation from the heavens of modern astronomy rather than the "Heaven of religion". In this sense, "even responsible scientific speculation and expensive technology of space exploration in search for other life are the peculiarly modern equivalent of angelology and Utopia or of demonology and apocalypse.


Esotericism


Graeco-Roman world

The Greek magical papyri, a set of texts forming into a completed grimoire that date somewhere between 100 BC and 400 AD, also list the names of the angels found in monotheistic religions, but they are presented as deities. Michael, Raphael, and Gabriel, though of Jewish origin, were popular figures in Hellenistic Egyptian paganism.


Gnosticism

In Gnostic cosmologies, angels are generally hostile celestial powers. Numerous references to angels present themselves in the Nag Hammadi Library, in which they both appear as malevolent servants of the Demiurge and innocent associates of the aeons.
The angels are credited with creating the world and also its rulers in constant battle against each other. They are usurpers of spiritual powers to whom the Gnostic must strive against to become free from envy and greed, and eventually obtains salvation in the immaterial realms.
On the other hand, the soul may act as an angel-like messenger who reveals mysteries and awakens knowledge in human consciousness.


Hermetic Qabalah

According to the Kabbalah, as described by the Golden Dawn, there are ten archangels, each commanding one of the choirs of angels and corresponding to one of the Sephirot. It is similar to the Jewish angelic hierarchy.


Theosophy

In the teachings of the Theosophical Society, Devas are regarded as living either in the atmospheres of the planets of the Solar System (Planetary Angels) or inside the Sun (Solar Angels) and they help to guide the operation of the processes of nature such as the process of evolution and the growth of plants; their appearance is reputedly like colored flames about the size of a human. It is believed by Theosophists that devas can be observed when the third eye is activated. Some (but not most) devas originally incarnated as human beings.
It is believed by Theosophists that nature spirits, elementals (gnomes, undines, sylphs, and salamanders), and fairies also can be observed when the third eye is activated. It is maintained by Theosophists that these less evolutionarily developed beings have never been previously incarnated as humans; they are regarded as being on a separate line of spiritual evolution called the "deva evolution"; eventually, as their souls advance as they reincarnate, it is believed they will incarnate as devas.
It is asserted by Theosophists that all of the above-mentioned beings possess etheric bodies that are composed of etheric matter, a type of matter finer and more pure that is composed of smaller particles than ordinary physical plane matter.


Yazidism

In Yazidism, there are seven Divine Beings (often called 'angels' in the literature) who were created by God prior to the creation of the world. God appointed Tawûsî Melek as their leader and assigned all of the world's affairs to these seven Divine Beings. These Divine Beings are referred to as Tawûsî Melek, Melek Şemsedîn, Melek Nasirdîn, Melek Fexredîn, Melek Sicadîn, Melek Şêxsin and Melek Şêxûbekir.


In art

According to mainstream Christian theology, angels are wholly spiritual beings and therefore do not eat, excrete or have sex, and have no gender. Although their different roles, such as warriors for some archangels, may suggest a human gender, Christian artists were careful not to give them specific gender attributes, at least until the 19th century, when some acquire breasts for example.

In an address during a General Audience of 6 August 1986, entitled "Angels participate in the history of salvation", Pope John Paul II explained that "[T]he angels have no 'body' (even if, in particular circumstances, they reveal themselves under visible forms because of their mission for the good of people)." Christian art perhaps reflects the descriptions in Revelation 4:6–8 of the Four Living Creatures (Greek: τὰ τέσσαρα ζῷα) and the descriptions in the Hebrew Bible of cherubim and seraphim (the chayot in Ezekiel's Merkabah vision and the Seraphim of Isaiah). However, while cherubim and seraphim have wings in the Bible, no angel is mentioned as having wings. The earliest known Christian image of an angel—in the Cubicolo dell'Annunziazione in the Catacomb of Priscilla (mid-3rd century)—is without wings. In that same period, representations of angels on sarcophagi, lamps and reliquaries also show them without wings, as for example the angel in the Sacrifice of Isaac scene in the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus (although the side view of the Sarcophagus shows winged angelic figures).
The earliest known representation of angels with wings is on the "Prince's Sarcophagus", attributed to the time of Theodosius I (379–395), discovered at Sarigüzel, near Istanbul, in the 1930s. From that period on, Christian art has represented angels mostly with wings, as in the cycle of mosaics in the Basilica of Saint Mary Major (432–440). Four- and six-winged angels, drawn from the higher grades of angels (especially cherubim and seraphim) and often showing only their faces and wings, are derived from Persian art and are usually shown only in heavenly contexts, as opposed to performing tasks on earth. They often appear in the pendentives of church domes or semi-domes. Prior to the Judeo–Christian tradition, in the Greek world the goddess Nike and the gods Eros and Thanatos were also depicted in human-like form with wings.
John Chrysostom explained the significance of angels' wings:

They manifest a nature's sublimity. That is why Gabriel is represented with wings. Not that angels have wings, but that you may know that they leave the heights and the most elevated dwelling to approach human nature. Accordingly, the wings attributed to these powers have no other meaning than to indicate the sublimity of their nature.
Angels are typically depicted in Mormon art as having no wings based on a quote from Joseph Smith ("An angel of God never has wings").
In terms of their clothing, angels, especially the Archangel Michael, were depicted as military-style agents of God and came to be shown wearing Late Antique military uniform. This uniform could be the normal military dress, with a tunic to about the knees, an armour breastplate and pteruges, but was often the specific dress of the bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor, with a long tunic and the loros, the long gold and jewelled pallium restricted to the Imperial family and their closest guards.
The basic military dress was shown in Western art into the Baroque period and beyond (see Reni picture above), and up to the present day in Eastern Orthodox icons. Other angels came to be conventionally depicted in long robes, and in the later Middle Ages they often wear the vestments of a deacon, a cope over a dalmatic. This costume was used especially for Gabriel in Annunciation scenes—for example the Annunciation in Washington by Jan van Eyck.
Some types of angels are described as possessing more unusual or frightening attributes, such as the fiery bodies of the Seraphim, and the wheel-like structures of the Ophanim.


Angels in the Ukrainian Vertep

In the modern Ukrainian Vertep (Nativity play), it is common to feature several distinct types of angels, each serving a specific symbolic and narrative function:

The Classic Angel: Traditionally dressed in white or gold and carrying a trumpet or a lily, this character serves a dual role. The angel acts as a guide for the shepherds and the Biblical Magi, and as a spiritual protector who confronts evil figures like King Herod and the Devil. The Classic Angel typically concludes the performance by delivering blessings of peace and prosperity to the audience.
The Angel of Peace: Embodying the biblical message of "peace on earth," this figure is typically dressed in light blue or silver. Often holding an olive branch, a palm branch, or a lit candle, the Angel of Peace represents hope and reconciliation, echoing global cultural symbols of spiritual protection during times of conflict.
The Angel of Ukraine: Serving as the spiritual patron and guardian of the nation, this character is inspired by the early 20th-century mystical visions of Belgian priest Joseph Schrijvers at the Univ Lavra. The Angel of Ukraine wears the national colors of blue and yellow. Its attributes often include a sword to symbolize the defense of good, a lit candle representing faith, and golden wheat ears symbolizing life and the Ukrainian land.


See also


References
Notes

Bibliography

Further reading


External links

Coptic Doxology of Heavenly Order
Zoroastrian angels
Jewish Encyclopedia entry on angels
Directory on popular piety and the liturgy. Principles and guidelines Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments. Directory of Popular Piety and the Liturgy, §§ 212–217, The Holy Angels, Vatican City, December 2001]
Angels, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Martin Palmer, Valery Rees & John Haldane (In Our Time, March 24, 2005)

Angel Cop (エンゼルコップ, Enzeru Koppu) is a six-part original video animation created and directed by Ichirō Itano. A manga adaptation written and illustrated by Taku Kitazaki was serialized in Newtype in 1989 and collected into a Newtype 100% collection released in April 1990.


Synopsis

The story initially starts by dealing with terrorism at the end of the 20th century, where Japan is the largest economy in the world. The communist radical group, the Red May, are working to bring down Japan's economy and take over the government. In response, a new state agency dubbed The Special Security Force is formed with the ability to act outside the law. However, when the Red May suddenly find themselves being wiped out, the force discovers that something else is hunting the terrorists.


Characters
Yō "Angel" Mikawa
The main protagonist and title character. A member of the Special Security Force, she initially believes in just getting the job accomplished and not caring who dies. In the end, however, she shows dismay after being forced to kill Raiden. Her story differs in the manga; she becomes cybernetic after being injured in an explosion, in contrast to her anime counterpart who remains human throughout.
Isamu "Raiden" Sakada
Angel's assigned partner in the Special Security Force. Injured during a pursuit of the Red May terrorists, he voluntarily allows himself to receive cybernetic enhancements in the anime. His new powers allow him to fight Lucifer to a standstill. Afterward, he forces Angel to kill him by causing his suit to detonate, destroying Lucifer in the process. Raiden's story differs in the manga, where Angel becomes cybernetic instead of him.
Yuuji "Hacker" Fuse
One of the Special Security agents. As his name implies, he handles hacking duties, but also participates in firefights, being enormously strong and muscled. He is killed when Lucifer takes control of his body and causes him to detonate a grenade in the anime. In the manga, he is killed by Freya.
Reika "Peace" Yogawa
The only other female Special Security agent, Peace handles explosives and is generally paired with Hacker. It is later revealed that she is in love with him. Peace dies when Lucifer drains her mind in the anime. As with Hacker, she is killed by Freya in the manga.
Masumi "Kuwata" Hirakawa
Taki's right-hand man, Kuwata appears to be second in command of the Special Security Agency. He is killed by Lucifer for allowing Tachihara to leave the Special Security's building. He wanted an alliance with the hunters shortly before his death.
Chief Taki
The head of the Special Security Force, he is responsible for giving his subordinates their orders. In the final episode, he arrives at the main police office to kill Maisaka, but is wounded in the attempt and left to bleed to death; however, he manages to plant a bomb in a tape recorder and escape the building.
Ichihara
A scientist for the Ministry of Defense who developed cybernetic technology for the police force. Taki, however, refused to allow Ichihara to test his works on the Special Security agents; nevertheless, Ichihara was able to give Raiden a cybernetic exoskeleton. During the final battle, he was killed when his laboratory exploded by Lucifer's power.
Lucifer
The main antagonist, Lucifer is a Hunter, a psychic sent to destroy anyone unjust in the world. Of the three Hunters, Lucifer is the most powerful and the most fanatical, causing a mass pile-up just to catch Tachihara and killing anyone who attempts to aide the Red May terrorists, the Special Service agents included. Her powers are telekinesis and telepathy, and is able to increase her physical and psychic power by sucking electricity. She is finally killed when Raiden's suit detonates in front of her. In the manga, she is killed by a cybernetic Angel.
Asura
The first Hunter encountered, Asura possesses psychic powers of teleporting and telekinesis, though the latter not on the same level as Lucifer's. He decides to join up with the Special Security agents after realizing Lucifer went too far in her methods. Asura soon becomes targeted by her, but survives the final encounter. In the manga, Asura never allies himself with the Special Security agents and is shot in the head by Angel.
Freya
A young girl Hunter. She possesses pyrokinetic and telepathic powers, and is also capable to create a kinetic shield out of fire. Asura and Freya appear to be very close. She is killed by Lucifer in the anime and Angel in the manga.
Governor Maisaka
The main villain, Maisaka is the Governor of Tokyo, and he is in command of all the police forces. He is responsible for Red May, awakening the hunters, and attempting to wipe out the Special Security Force. He was killed when a bomb Taki planted inside his tape recorder detonated.
Chief Togawa
Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department Public Security Bureau Third Public Security Division Chief and Maisaka's second in command. Togawa was seemingly killed by Angel during an attack on Ichihara's building, but the man killed was revealed to be a decoy. The real Togawa perishes in the explosion that also kills Maisaka.
Tachihara
The new head of the Red May, Tachihara initially manages to escape from the Special Security Force, but is eventually captured and tortured. He was also a pawn of Maisaka. Hacker and Peace attempt to bring him to Ichihara's laboratory for safety, but the three are killed by Lucifer on the highway.


Voice cast

Additional voices (Japanese): Atsushi Anbe, Emi Shinohara, Hajime Koseki, Hidetoshi Nakamura, Hitoshi Horiki, Kiyonobu Suzuki, Kyousei Tsukui, Shigeru Shiibashi, Takeshi Oba
Additional voices (English): Colin Bruce, John Fitzgerald Jay, William Dufris, William Roberts


Releases
Originally licensed by Manga Entertainment, Discotek Media have announced in May 2018 that they acquired the rights to the OVA and announced a plan to re-release it on DVD and Blu-ray in North America, with a new uncensored subtitle track, essays, an interview, trailers and will include the English dubbed version. Some anti-Semitic content within the original Japanese dialogue were censored from the previous Manga Entertainment English releases. The OVA was later re-released on Blu-ray as limited edition steelbook remastered from 35mm source prints on February 22, 2022.


Episodes and staff
All episodes directed by Ichirō Itano, with character designs by Nobuteru Yūki, and musical score composed by Hiroshi Ogasawara.


Reception
The anime entry in The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction notes that the show is a "absurd, action-packed and gore-heavy anime with only one sympathetic character", as well as "a deeply unpleasant mix" of racism, conspiracy theories, anti-Semitism and nationalism.


Notes


References


External links
Angel Cop (OVA) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia

The Anglo-Japanese Alliance (日英同盟, Nichi-Ei Dōmei) was an alliance between the United Kingdom and the Empire of Japan which was effective from 1902 to 1923. The treaty creating the alliance was signed at Lansdowne House in London on 30 January 1902 by British foreign secretary Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne and Japanese diplomat Hayashi Tadasu. After the preceding era of unequal treaties enforced on Asian countries including Japan, the alliance was a military pact concluded on more equal terms between a Western power and non-Western nation. It reflected the success of Meiji era reforms that modernized and industrialized Japan's economy, society and military, which enabled Japan to extract itself from the inferior position it had previously shared with other Asian countries like China, which had been subordinated to Western empires either through formal colonial acquisition or unequal treaties.
One shared motivation for the agreement was that a diplomatic alliance might deter other world powers that might otherwise encroach on British and Japanese imperial interests in Asia. For the British, the alliance marked the end of a period of "splendid isolation" while allowing for greater focus on protecting its rule over India and competing in the Anglo-German naval arms race, as part of a larger strategy to reduce imperial overcommitment and recall the Royal Navy to defend Britain. By contrast, it came at a time of Japan's ascendancy; Japan had not only successfully abrogated the unequal treaties it was previously subject to by the Western powers, but was now a fledging empire in its own right: Japan had imposed its own unequal treaty on Korea in 1876 and now controlled Formosa (Taiwan) as a colony, as Taiwan been ceded by Qing China to Japan in the Treaty of Shimonoseki, after the First Sino-Japanese War. Consequently, Japan was now developing its own imperial sphere of influence, and felt that a conflict with Russia was imminent over rival ambitions in Manchuria and Korea, especially after the Triple Intervention in 1895, in which Russia, France, and Germany coerced Japan into relinquishing its claim on the Liaodong Peninsula. Article 3 of the alliance promised support if either signatory became involved in war with more than one power, and thus deterred France from assisting its ally Russia in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905. Instead, France concluded the Entente Cordiale with Britain and limited its support of Russia to providing loans. Japan also gained international prestige from the alliance and used it as a foundation for their diplomacy for two decades, although the alliance angered the United States and some British dominions, whose opinion of Japan worsened and gradually became hostile.
After Japan's victory in the Russo-Japanese war and the resulting treaty that granted the Japanese control over Korea, the alliance was renewed in 1905 and 1911. In 1914, it enabled Japan's entry into World War I and capture of German-held territories in Asia. Britain grew increasingly distrustful of Japan over its Asian ambitions, and the alliance was ended with the signing of the Four-Power Treaty in 1921 and terminated upon its ratification in 1923.


Motivations and reservations

The possibility of an alliance between Great Britain and Japan had been canvassed since 1895, when Britain refused to join the Triple Intervention of France, Germany and Russia against the Japanese occupation of the Liaodong Peninsula. While this single event was an unstable basis for an alliance, the case was strengthened by the support Britain had given Japan in its drive towards modernisation and their co-operative efforts to put down the Boxer Rebellion. Newspapers of both countries voiced support for such an alliance; in Britain, Francis Brinkley of The Times and Edwin Arnold of The Daily Telegraph were the driving force behind such support, while in Japan the pro-alliance mood of politician Ōkuma Shigenobu stirred the Mainichi and Yomiuri newspapers into pro-alliance advocacy. The 1894 Anglo-Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation had also paved the way for equal relations and the possibility of an alliance.
In the end, the common interest truly fuelling the alliance was opposition to Russian expansion, such as the invasion of Manchuria continuing after the Boxer Rebellion. This was made clear as early as the 1890s, when the British diplomat Cecil Spring Rice identified that Britain and Japan working in concert was the only way to challenge Russian power in the region. Negotiations began when Russia began to move into China. Nevertheless, both countries had their reservations. Britain was cautious about abandoning its policy of "splendid isolation", wary of antagonizing Russia, and unwilling to act on the treaty if Japan were to attack the United States. There were factions in the Japanese government that still hoped for a compromise with Russia, including the highly powerful political figure Hirobumi Itō, who had served four terms as Prime Minister of Japan. It was thought that friendship within Asia would be more amenable to the US, which was uncomfortable with the rise of Japan as a power. Furthermore, Britain was unwilling to protect Japanese interests in Korea and likewise, the Japanese were unwilling to support Britain in India.
Following the accession of Edward VII to the British throne in January 1901, Hayashi and Lansdowne began discussions that July, although disputes over Korea and India stalled them all the way into November. At this point, Itō requested a delay in negotiations in order to attempt a reconciliation with Russia. He found little appetite for such in Saint Petersburg, and with Britain expressing concerns about duplicity on Japan's part, Hayashi hurriedly re-entered negotiations. A workable treaty was agreed to in January of the same winter.
The treaty alliance represented the first on equal terms between Eastern and Western nations. For Britain, it also represented the end of its period of independence from foreign entanglements, and of its role as the world's only superpower, a policy shift soon reinforced within the next 5 years by the Anglo-French Entente Cordiale and Anglo-Russian Convention.


Terms of the 1902 treaty

The treaty contained six articles:
Article 1

The High Contracting parties, having mutually recognised the independence of China and Korea, declare themselves to be entirely uninfluenced by aggressive tendencies in either country, having in view, however, their special interests, of which those of Great Britain relate principally to China, whilst Japan, in addition to the interests which she possesses in China, is interested in a peculiar degree, politically as well as commercially and industrially in Korea, the High Contracting Parties recognise that it will be admissible for either of them to take such measures as may be indispensable in order to safeguard those interests if threatened either by the aggressive action of any other Power, or by disturbances arising in China or Korea, and necessitating the intervention of either of the High Contracting Parties for the protection of the lives and properties of its subjects.
Article 2

Declaration of neutrality if either signatory becomes involved in war through Article 1.
Article 3

Promise of support if either signatory becomes involved in war with more than one Power.
Article 4

Signatories promise not to enter into separate agreements with other Powers to the prejudice of this alliance.
Article 5

The signatories promise to communicate frankly and fully with each other when any of the interests affected by this treaty are in jeopardy.
Article 6

Treaty to remain in force for five years and then at one years' notice, unless notice was given at the end of the fourth year.
Articles 2 and 3 were most crucial concerning war and mutual defense.
The treaty laid out an acknowledgment of Japanese interests in Korea without obligating Britain to help if a conflict arose where Japan only had one adversary. Japan was likewise not obligated to defend British interests unless there were two adversaries.
Although written using careful and clear language, the two sides understood the treaty slightly differently. Britain saw it as a gentle warning to Russia, while Japan was emboldened by it. From that point on, even those of a moderate stance refused to accept a compromise over the issue of Korea. Extremists saw it as an open invitation for imperial expansion, many in Japan having long desired a showdown with Russia. The provision on the involvement of more than one power (article 3) recalled the Triple Intervention by the Russian-French-German coalition in 1895, and strengthened Japan's hand both diplomatically and militarily against a potential European coalition.
This treaty was signed by Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne, and Count Hayashi Tadasu on 30 January, effective 31 January 1902 for five years.


Intelligence Agreements

In May 1902, Major General Fukushima Yasumasa, who was a senior intelligence officer of the Army General Staff and the initial commander of the Japanese Army sent to China to stop the Boxer Rebellion in 1900, was sent to London to wrap up informal discussions on military intelligence cooperation.  Director General of Mobilisation and Military Intelligence, Sir William Nicholson headed the British side of the negotiation, and various intelligence cooperation agreements were signed between the two in July.  Fukushima represented Emperor Meiji at the coronation of King Edward VII on 9 August and stayed until September 1902 to work on the details. The existence and contents of the agreements were not made public.


1905 Revision
The alliance was renewed and expanded in 1905. This was partly prompted by Japan's gains in the Russo-Japanese War, and by the British suspicion about Russian intentions in South Asia, leading to Britain considering asking Japan to help defend India. This August 1905 revision additionally called for Japanese support of British interests in India (if Britain faced more than one adversary as stipulated in the original).
This revision was signed by Lords Lansdowne and Hayashi on 12 August 1905, effective 13 August for 10 years.
Within four months after the signing of this revision, Korea became a Japanese protectorate, and Itō Hirobumi was posted as the Resident-General to Seoul in February 1906.


1911 Revision
Although the "second" alliance in 1905 was effective for a decade, the alliance was revised earlier in 1911.
As a background, William McKinley won the 1896 United States presidential election, succeeding Grover Cleveland, who was a friend of Queen Liliʻuokalani of Hawaii. This Republican victory led to British-American rapprochement, and the annexation of the Republic of Hawaiʻi by the US, giving impetus to expansionists in the US. As a result of 1898 Spanish–American War, the Mariana Islands (including Guam) came under the United States control in December 1898. The Empire of Japan fought and lost against the US in 1899–1902, supporting the Philippines in Philippine–American War, which resulted in establishing control of the Philippine Islands by the US.  The expansionistic policy of the Republican US administration was carried over to Theodore Roosevelt in 1901.
Great power politics substantially changed following the Anglo-Russian entente of 1907, which settled the Russo-British Great Game; continued Japanese negotiations in the wake of the Russo-Japanese War, including a 1907 partitioning of Manchuria with Russia; and the UK's growing rivalry with the German Empire.
With the increasing Japanese and the US influence not only in the Pacific but also in global politics in this context, Britain negotiated a "third" Anglo-Japanese alliance to carefully remove the United States from the possible 'adversary' in the agreement (ARTICLE 4), and Japan agreed in return for restoring Japan's tariff autonomy. Komura Jutarō and later Prime Minister Katō Takaaki were major negotiators during this 1911 revision.
This revision was signed by Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs Edward Grey and Japanese Ambassador to London, Count Katō Takaaki on 13 July, effective 14 July 1911, with a 10 year term until July 1921.


Effects


Forming alliance and rivalries

The first version of the alliance was announced on 12 February 1902. In response, Russia sought to form alliances with France and Germany, which Germany declined. The French also were reluctant to become more deeply involved with Russia in east Asia. On 16 March 1902, a joint Franco-Russian declaration was issued responding to the alliance, reserving their right to intervene in and around China to defend their interests. The British and later historians found this declaration to be "anodyne", signaling that France was reconsidering its military obligations towards Russia. China and the United States were strongly opposed to the alliance.


Unofficial role in Russo-Japanese War
The Russo-Japanese War broke out in 1904, as Japan sought to halt the expansion of the Russian Empire's colonies in China. Britain did not officially join the Russo-Japanese War, but supported Japan in espionage, ship design, finance, and diplomacy during the war.
Meanwhile, even before the war, British and Japanese intelligence had co-operated against Russia due to the Anglo-Japanese Alliance. During the war, Indian Army stations in Malaya and China often intercepted and read wireless and telegraph cable traffic relating to the war, which was shared with the Japanese. In their turn, the Japanese shared information about Russia with the British with one British official writing of the "perfect quality" of Japanese intelligence. In particular, British and Japanese intelligence gathered much evidence that Germany was supporting Russia in the war as part of a bid to disturb the balance of power in Europe, which led to British officials increasingly perceiving that country as a threat to the international order.
After the war ended, Britain did not mediate the Treaty of Portsmouth directly; the U.S., under President Theodore Roosevelt, fulfilled that role.


World War I

The alliance's provisions for mutual defence required Japan to enter the First World War on the British side. The Treaty made possible the Japanese seizure of German possessions in the Pacific north of the equator during the War. Japan attacked the German base at Qingdao in 1914 and forced the Germans to surrender (see Siege of Tsingtao). Japanese officers onboard British warships were casualties at the Battle of Jutland in 1916, and on HMS Vanguard in 1917. In 1917, Japanese warships were sent to the Mediterranean and assisted in the protection of Allied shipping near Malta from U-boat attacks. A memorial at the Kalkara Naval Cemetery in Malta is dedicated to the 72 Japanese sailors who died in the conflict, including the 1917 torpedoing of the Japanese destroyer Sakaki.


Cultural exchanges

The alliance formed the basis for positive trading and cultural exchanges between Britain and Japan.  Japanese agencies published numerous English-language releases and publications. Rapid industrialisation and the development of the Japanese armed forces provided significant new export opportunities for British shipyards and arms manufacturers. Japanese educated in Britain brought new knowledge in science, engineering, and medicine to Japan, such as advances in fluid- and thermo-dynamics, and ophthalmology. British artists of the time such as James McNeill Whistler, Aubrey Beardsley and Charles Rennie Mackintosh were heavily inspired by Japanese kimono, swords, crafts and architecture.
Unique cultural exchanges included that the author Yoshimoto Tadasu (b. 1878, d. 1973), who wrote True Britain (Shin no Eikoku) in 1902, was the first blind person in Japan to receive higher education, and brought some British ideas on public welfare to Japan. The clergyman Kumagai Tetsutaro (b. 1883, d. 1979) praised the book as having a major impact on opportunities for people with blindness.
The Japan–British Exhibition in 1910 in White City, London had eight million visitors. It sought to promote knowledge of Japan's modernization and the idea of an 'alliance of peoples' between Britain and Japan. It featured Japanese fine arts, musicians, Sumo demonstrations, and influenced by Edwardian expectations, it featured exhibitions of Ainu, Taiwanese and Japanese 'villages'. The organizers portrayed a cultural-historical parallel between Britain and Japan as symmetrical "Island Empires" in East and West. Organized by the Japanese government, it was one of the largest such expositions at its time.


Limitations
Despite the purportedly friendly relations between Britain and Japan during the early 20th century, the relationship started to strain over various issues. One such strain was the issue of the "racial equality clause" as proposed by the Japanese delegation at the Paris Peace Conference. The clause, which was to be attached to the Covenant of the League of Nations, was compatible with the British stance of equality for all subjects as a principle for maintaining imperial unity; however, there were significant deviations in the stated interests of Britain's dominions, notably Australia, and the British delegation ultimately acceded to imperial opposition and declined to support the clause.
Another strain was the Twenty-One Demands issued by Japan to the Republic of China in 1915. The demands would have drastically increased Japanese influence in China and transformed the Chinese state into a de facto protectorate of Japan. Feeling desperate, the Chinese government appealed to Britain and the U.S., which forced Japan to moderate the demands issued; ultimately, the Japanese government gained little influence in China, but lost prestige amongst the Western nations (including Britain, which was affronted and no longer trusted the Japanese as a reliable ally).
Even though Britain was the wealthiest industrialized power, and Japan was a newly industrialized power with a large export market, which would seem to create natural economic ties, those ties were somewhat limited, which provided a major limitation of the alliance. British banks saw Japan as a risky investment due to what they saw as restrictive property laws and an unstable financial situation, and offered loans to Japan with high interest rates, similar to those they offered the Ottoman Empire, Chile, China, and Egypt, which was disappointing to Japan. The banker and later Prime Minister Takahashi Korekiyo argued that Britain was implying, through unattractive loan terms, that Japan had reverted from one of the "civilized nations" to "undeveloped nations", referring that Japan had more easily received foreign capital to fund its First Sino-Japanese War than the Russo-Japanese War. Nathaniel Rothschild was initially skeptical of Japan's economy; however, he would later describe Osaka as the "Manchester of Japan" and Japan as "one of the countries of the future." Henry Dyer wrote after 1906 that Japanese bonds "has aroused keen interest among British investors, who have always been partial to Japanese bonds." Dyer, a recipient of the Order of the Rising Sun from Emperor Meiji, had played a role in the expansion of industrialization and engineering in Japan as part of a significant foreign investment. Dyer criticized what he saw as widespread British skepticism of Japan's economy. Meanwhile, influential industrialists in Japan such as businessman Iwasaki Yanosuke were at times skeptical of foreign investment, which led the Japanese government to channel it through some controlled enterprises acting as intermediaries with the private sector in London and Tokyo, which was seen as excess regulation by some British industrialists. Nevertheless, Britain did lend capital to Japan during the Russo-Japanese War, while Japan provided major loans to the Entente during World War I.


End of the treaty

The alliance was viewed as an obstacle already at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919–1920. On 8 July 1920, the two governments issued a joint statement to the effect that the alliance treaty "is not entirely consistent with the letter of that Covenant (of the League of Nations), which both Governments earnestly desire to respect".
The demise of the alliance was signaled by the 1921 Imperial Conference, in which British and Dominion leaders convened to determine a unified international policy. One of the major issues of the conference was the renewal of the Anglo–Japanese Alliance. The conference began with all but Canadian Prime Minister Arthur Meighen supporting the immediate renewal of an alliance with Japan. The prevailing hope was for a continuance of the alliance with the Pacific power, which could potentially provide security for British imperial interests in the area. The Australians feared that they could not fend off any advances from the Imperial Japanese Navy, and desired a continuance of the buildup of naval resources for a possible future conflict as they feared that an alliance with the United States (then in a state of post-war isolationism) would provide little protection.
Meighen, fearing that a conflict could develop between Japan and the United States, demanded the British Empire remove itself from the treaty to avoid being forced into a war between the two nations. The rest of the delegates agreed that it was best to court  America and try to find a solution that the American government would find suitable, but only Meighen called for the complete abrogation of the treaty. The American government feared that the renewal of the Anglo–Japanese Alliance would create a Japanese-dominated market in the Pacific, and close China off from American trade. These fears were elevated by the news media in America and Canada, which reported alleged secret anti-American clauses in the treaty, and advised the public to support abrogation.
The press, combined with Meighen's convincing argument of Canadian fears that Japan would attack imperial assets in China, caused the Imperial Conference to shelve the alliance. The conference communicated their desire to consider leaving the alliance to the League of Nations, which stated that the alliance would continue, as originally stated with the leaving party giving the other a twelve-month notice of their intentions.
Empire delegates convinced America to invite several nations to Washington to participate in talks regarding Pacific and Far East policies, specifically naval disarmament. When Japan came to the Washington Naval Conference, there was significant distrust of Britain in the press and public opinion, even amongst Japanese papers that had previously been more supportive of the Anglo-Japanese alliance.
Despite the growing rift, Japan joined the conference in hopes of avoiding a war with the United States. The Pacific powers of the United States, Japan, France and Britain would sign the Four-Power Treaty, and adding on various other countries such as China to create the Nine-Power Treaty. The Four-Power Treaty would provide a minimal structure for the expectations of international relations in the Pacific, as well as a loose alliance without any commitment to armed alliances. The Four-Power Treaty at the Washington Conference made the Anglo–Japanese Alliance defunct in December, 1921; however, it would not officially terminate until all parties ratified the treaty on 17 August 1923, as Britain did not notify Japan, nor did Japan notify the UK, of the termination after the July 1921 end of term, as required by ARTICLE 6 of the 1911 revision.

At that time, the Alliance was officially terminated, as per Article IV in the Anglo–Japanese Alliance Treaties of 1902 and 1911. The distrust between the British Empire and Japan, as well as the manner in which the Anglo–Japanese Alliance concluded, have been suggested by some as being the leading causes of Japan's involvement in World War II, and that had the alliance not been terminated, Anglo-Japanese ties would not have deteriorated to that degree.
However, more recent scholarship has argued that such an interpretation amounts to historical myth-making, because it neglects how the political rivalry resulting from Japan and Britain's increasingly overlapping spheres of imperial influence had already substantially strained the alliance's political rationale for years before its termination. One key line of evidence is that Japan-British imperial interests had substantially conflicted before 1921 because Japan was already perceived to be undermining European colonial rule over Asia. Britain had specifically become increasingly suspicious of a potential Japanese threat to its Asian colonies and interests due to growing Japanese ambitions in China, the rise in Pan-Asianism, as demonstrated by the support shown by Japanese state and non-state actors for Indian revolutionaries, and the presence of Japanese propagandists in Malaya and India. Therefore, the end of the Alliance would instead be symptomatic of the already-present political reality of eroding ties between both countries, rather than its cause.
Such tensions were also evident in then-contemporary British political figures, such as Lord Curzon, who stated in 1920 that the main reason for the alliance with the "insidious and unscrupulous" Japanese was to keep them in order, rather than rooted in a friendly relations and diplomatic trust. These views were also reflected in British papers such as The Times, which even questioned Japanese contributions to the Allied side, and expressed suspicion towards Japan and sympathy with China in the aftermath of the 1919 Paris Peace Conference.
According to Zoltan Buzas, racially shaped threat perceptions led the British and the Americans to push for the termination of the alliance.


See also
List of military alliances
Anglo-German naval arms race
Anglo-Japanese Treaty of Commerce and Navigation
Franco-Japanese Alliance attempted
Eight-Nation Alliance
History of Japanese foreign relations
Japan–Korea Treaty of 1905
Franco-Japanese Treaty of 1907
Japan–United Kingdom relations
Japanese entry into World War I
Japan during World War I
Root–Takahira Agreement
Open Door Policy


Notes


Citations


Further reading
Brebner, J. B. "Canada, The Anglo-Japanese Alliance and the Washington Conference." Political Science Quarterly 50#1 (1935): 45–58. online
Daniels, Gordon, Janet Hunter, Ian Nish, and David Steeds. (2003). Studies in the Anglo-Japanese Alliance (1902–1923): London School of Economics (LSE), Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines (STICERD) Paper No. IS/2003/443: Read Full paper (pdf) – May 2008
Davis, Christina L. "Linkage diplomacy: economic and security bargaining in the Anglo-Japanese alliance, 1902–23." International Security 33.3 (2009): 143–179. online
Fry, Michael G. "The North Atlantic Triangle and the Abrogation of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance." Journal of Modern History 39.1 (1967): 46–64. online
Harcreaves, J. D. "The Anglo-Japanese Alliance." History Today (1952) 2#4 pp 252–258
Langer, William.  The Diplomacy of Imperialism 1890–1902 (2nd ed. 1950), pp. 745–86. online free to borrow
Lister-Hotta, Ayako, Ian Nish, and David Steeds. (2002). Anglo-Japanese Alliance: LSE STICERD Paper No. IS/2002/432: Read Full paper (pdf) – May 2008
Lowe, Peter. Great Britain and Japan 1911–15: A Study of British Far Eastern Policy (Springer, 1969).
Nish, Ian Hill. (1972). Alliance in Decline: A Study in Anglo-Japanese Relations 1908–23.  London: Athlone Press.  ISBN 978-0-485-13133-8 (cloth)
Nish, Ian Hill. (1966).  The Anglo-Japanese Alliance: The diplomacy of two island empires 1894–1907. London: Athlone Press. [reprinted by RoutledgeCurzon, London, 2004. ISBN 978-0-415-32611-7 (paper)]
O'Brien, Phillips Payson. (2004). The Anglo-Japanese Alliance, 1902–1922. London: RoutledgeCurzon.  ISBN 978-0-415-32611-7 cloth)
Satow, Ernest and George Alexander Lensen. (1968). Korea and Manchuria between Russia and Japan 1895–1904: The Observations of Sir Ernest Satow, British Minister Plenipotentiary to Japan (1895–1900) and China (1900–1906). Tokyo: Sophia University Press/Tallahassee, Florida: Diplomatic Press. ASIN B0007JE7R6; ASIN B000NP73RK
Spinks, Charles N. "The Termination of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance." Pacific Historical Review 6#4 (1937): 321–340. online
Steiner, Zara S. "Great Britain and the Creation of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance." Journal of Modern History 31.1 (1959): 27–36. online


External links
Main points of the Anglo-Japanese agreements – by FirstWorldWar.com
Text of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance of 1902 (bilingual)
Beasley, W. G. (1962). The Modern History of Japan. Boston: Frederick A. Praeger. ASIN B000HHFAWE (cloth) – ISBN 978-0-03-037931-4 (paper)

Anne Marie McCaffrey (born 7 August 1955) is a Canadian former swimmer. She competed in the women's 400 metre freestyle at the 1972 Summer Olympics.


References


External links
Anne Marie McCaffrey at Olympedia
Anne-Marie McCaffrey-Clark at Olympics.com

Anthony Obi (13 January 1952 – 1 January 2022) was a Nigerian Lieutenant Colonel who served as Military Administrator of Osun State from August 1996 to August 1998, during the military regime of General Sani Abacha.
He then became Military Administrator of Abia State in August 1998, handing over power to the civilian governor Orji Uzor Kalu in May 1999.


Life and career
Obi was born on 13 January 1952. He inherited problems in Osun State with conflict between the Ife and Modakeke people, which periodically erupted into violence. A crisis was triggered when his administration decided to move the local council headquarters from one town to the other.
Anthony Obi set up a Royal Committee to make recommendations on resolving the crisis, and declared a seven-day fasting and prayer program in March 1998 concentrating on peace in Ile-Ife.
During his administration of Osun State, he commissioned a water corporation office in Ifetedo, but did not provide adequate water supplies. When two factions of the union of Local Government Employees began publishing two rival newsletters, Anthony Obi banned them both.
In September 1998, Lieutenant Colonel Anthony Obi told reporters that the 31 members of the Provisional Ruling Council and all 36 state military administrators would declare their assets, in line with General Abdulsalami Abubakar's intention to hand over a clean administration to civilian rulers in May 1999.
As administrator of Abia State, he built Camp Neya, a government retreat and golf course in undulating country in Igbere, commissioned on his last day in power on 28 May 1999.
Obi died on 1 January 2022, at the age of 69.


References

Antitrogus morbillosus, the tableland pasture scarab, is a species of beetle of the family Scarabaeidae. It is found in Australia (New South Wales and Victoria).


Description
Adults reach a length of about 20–26 mm (0.79–1.02 in). The body and legs are uniform bright reddish brown. The antennae and palpi are as in Antitrogus robertsi.


Life history
This species is a pest of pastures, with the larvae damaging grasses and legumes. Recorded host plants include Trifolium repens and Philaris tuberosa. Adults have been recorded from November to January.


References

General Arafan Camara (2 January 1948 – 6 January 2008) was a politician and military official in Guinea. Camara was named defense minister on 28 March 2007 after mass protests forced a new government. He was dismissed as minister on 12 May 2007 after soldiers rioted concerning better working conditions and the re-instatement of sacked military leaders. He was replaced by retired Army General Bailo Diallo. He died on 6 January 2008, 4 days after his 60th birthday.


Sources
"Guinea's defence minister sacked" BBC News, 11 May 2007
U.S. State Department profile of Guinea (4/07)
Obituary

The  Arboreto Pascul is an arboretum located near Pradandons, Tarcento, Province of Udine, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Italy. It is open weekdays; admission is free.
The arboretum was established in 1953 by the Friuli-Venezia Giulia regional government, primarily to cultivate exotic conifers. In 1974 its mission expanded to encompass botanical education, and to this end its collections now include as many species as possible of both conifer and hardwood, exotic and indigenous. It currently contains about 2,000 plants representing 72 species from 40 genera (14 gymnosperm and 26 angiosperm).


See also
List of botanical gardens in Italy


References
Gianni Paladino, L'arboreto Pascul di Tarcento, 3rd edition, Trieste : Regione Autonoma Friuli-Venezia Giulia, 1983. 261 pages.
Touring Club Italiano, L'Italia dei giardini, Touring Editore, 2005 page 80. ISBN 88-365-3342-6.
Agenzia di informazione e accoglienza turistica (Italian)
Horti entry
BGCI entry

Ardozyga aspetodes is a species of moth in the family Gelechiidae. It was described by Edward Meyrick in 1904. It is found in Australia where it has been recorded from Victoria.
The wingspan is about 21 mm (0.83 in). The forewings are dark brown-grey with the stigmata dark fuscous, each followed by a minute pale dot, the plical obliquely beyond the first discal, the second discal transverse. There is a series of pale dots along the posterior part of the costa and termen. The hindwings are fuscous with a terminal series of pale dots.


References

Aristo of Chios (Greek: Ἀρίστων ὁ Χῖος Ariston ho Chios; fl. c. 260 BC), also spelled Ariston, was a Greek Stoic philosopher and colleague of Zeno of Citium. He outlined a system of Stoic philosophy that was, in many ways, closer to earlier Cynic philosophy. He rejected the logical and physical sides of philosophy endorsed by Zeno and emphasized ethics. Although agreeing with Zeno that Virtue was the supreme good, he rejected the idea that morally indifferent things such as health and wealth could be ranked according to whether they are naturally preferred. An important philosopher in his day, his views were eventually marginalized by Zeno's successors.


Life
Aristo, son of Miltiades, was born on the island of Chios sometime around 300 BC. He came to Athens where he attended the lectures of Zeno of Citium, and also, for a time, the lectures of Polemo, (the head of the Academy from 314 to 269). Although he was a member of Zeno's circle he soon departed from Zeno's teachings, largely rejecting the two non-ethical parts of Stoic philosophy – physics and logic – endorsed by Zeno.
A man of persuasive eloquence, Aristo was such a good speaker that he was called the Siren. He was also called Phalanthus, from his baldness. He set up his own school in the Cynosarges gymnasium (a place associated with Cynic philosophy) and attracted many pupils, so much so that when he was accused of exposing the dignity of philosophy by his freedom to all-comers, he answered, that "he wished that Nature had given understanding to wild beasts, that they too might be capable of being his hearers." His followers called themselves Aristonians and included the scientist Eratosthenes and the Stoics: Apollophanes, Diphilus, and Miltiades.
Aristo engaged in much debate with Arcesilaus, the leader of the Academy, defending Stoic epistemology against Arcesilaus's skeptical views. On one occasion he accused Arcesilaus of being: "Plato the head of him, Pyrrho the tail, midway Diodorus". meaning that Arcesilaus presented himself as a Platonist, the substance of what he taught was the dialectics of Diodorus, but his actual philosophy was that of Pyrrhonism.
In his old age, he reportedly lapsed from the Stoic ideal and indulged in pleasure. "Eratosthenes the Cyrenean ... in his treatise which is entitled Ariston, represents his master as subsequently being much addicted to luxury, speaking as follows: "And before now, I have at times discovered him breaking down, as it were, the partition wall between pleasure and virtue, and appearing on the side of pleasure." And Apollophanes (and he was an acquaintance of Ariston), in his Ariston (for he also wrote a book with that title), shows the way in which his master was addicted to pleasure."
It is not known when he died, but he is supposed to have died from sunstroke on account of his baldness.


Philosophy
Zeno divided philosophy into three parts: Logic (which was a very wide subject including rhetoric, grammar, and the theories of perception and thought); Physics (including not just science, but the divine nature of the universe as well); and Ethics, the end goal of which was to achieve happiness through the right way of living according to Nature.  It is impossible to describe in full Aristo's philosophical system because none of his writings survived intact, but from the fragments preserved by later writers, it is clear that Aristo was heavily influenced by earlier Cynic philosophy:


Logic
Aristo regarded Logic as unimportant, saying that it had nothing to do with us. "Dialectic reasonings," he said, "were like cobwebs, artificially constructed, but otherwise useless."  It is unlikely that he rejected all Logic, and it is notable that Zeno, too, compared the skills of dialecticians "to right measures that do not measure wheat or anything else worthwhile but chaff and dung." According to Stephen Menn, Aristo was the first to add "somehow disposed in relation to something" to the Stoic Categories.


Physics
Aristo also rejected Physics, saying that it was beyond us.  This is reflected in his views concerning God:

Aristo holds that no form of God is conceivable, and denies him sensation, and is in a state of complete uncertainty as to whether he is, or is not, animate.
This was in marked opposition to Zeno to whom "the universe was animate and possessed of reason." He did, however, agree with Zeno that Nature was comprehensible, arguing against the Academics.  He once asked an Academic "Do you not even see the man who is sitting next to you?", and when the Academic replied, "I do not," Aristo said: "Who then has blinded you; who has robbed you of your eyes?"


Ethics
For Aristo, Ethics was the only true branch of philosophy, but he also limited this category, removing its practical side: advice concerning individual actions was largely useless:

He holds that it does not sink into the mind, having in it nothing but old wives' precepts, and that the greatest benefit is derived from the actual dogmas of philosophy and from the definition of the Supreme Good. When a man has gained a complete understanding of this definition and has thoroughly learned it, he can frame for himself a precept directing what is to be done in a given case.
For Aristo, only the sage makes flawless decisions and does not need advice, for everybody else with clouded minds, advice is ineffective:

For precepts will be of no avail while the mind is clouded with error; only when the cloud is dispersed will it be clear what one's duty is in each case. Otherwise, you will merely be showing the sick man what he ought to do if he were well, instead of making him well.
The purpose of life was to seek the Supreme Good, and here Aristo set up a challenge to Zeno.  While agreeing with Zeno that Virtue was the supreme good, he totally rejected the idea that external advantages (health, wealth, etc.), although morally "indifferent", could be ranked in terms of whether they are naturally preferred or not:

Aristo of Chios denied that health, and everything similar to it, is a preferred indifferent. To call it a preferred indifferent is equivalent to judging it a good, and different practically in name alone; For without exception things indifferent as between virtue and vice have no difference at all, nor are some of them preferred by nature while others are dispreferred, but in the face of the different circumstances of the occasions, neither those said to be preferred prove to be unconditionally preferred, nor are those said to be dispreferred of necessity dispreferred; For if healthy men had to serve a tyrant and be destroyed for this reason, while the sick had to be released from the service and, therewith also, from destruction, the wise man would rather choose sickness in this circumstance than health.
Zeno would have agreed that there could be circumstances when one might choose illness for the good of the world, but for Zeno, health is a naturally preferred state; Aristo rejected this.  For Aristo, not only are there times when illness might be preferred over health, (health cannot always be unconditionally preferred), but health is not even a natural advantage, and one can never assume that it is better than illness. Although the sage can (and often must) choose between various indifferent things, he should never make the error of assuming that they could be naturally preferred.
For Zeno, the chief good was to live according to Nature; for Aristo, the chief good was:

to live in perfect indifference to all those things that are of an intermediate character between virtue and vice; making not the slightest difference between them, but regarding them all on a footing of equality. For that the wise man resembles a good actor; who, whether he is filling the part of Agamemnon or Thersites, will perform them both equally well.
The highest good is thus to follow virtue as the supreme good, avoid vice as the supreme evil, and to live in a state of perfect indifference towards everything else. Aristo did, however, agree with Zeno on the unity of virtue, even if it is often labelled as different things:

Aristo made virtue one thing in its essence, and called it health; but in what it is somehow related to, he made the virtues differentiated and plural, just as if one wanted to call our vision in grasping light-colored things light-sight, but dark-sight in grasping dark-colored ones.  For virtue in considering things to be done and not to be done is called wisdom, but it is called temperance in bringing order to our appetites and defining what is measured and timely in pleasures, and justice in busying itself with joint enterprises and contracts with other people.
The problem remains of how one can achieve a virtuous state if one can not make rational choices between which things in life are preferred and dispreferred and has only an abstract goal of perfect virtue.  Aristo left the question unanswered, and Cicero writing in the first century BC gave what has been the standard view of Aristo's philosophy ever since:

For if we maintained that all things were absolutely indifferent, the whole of life would be thrown in confusion, as it is by Aristo, and no function or task could be found for wisdom, since there would be absolutely no distinction between the things that pertain to the conduct of life, and no choice need be exercised among them.
Whether or not this view is correct, Aristo clearly thought he was doing something more positive than playing the Cynic and trying to undermine the roots of the Stoic system:

He who has equipped himself for the whole of life does not need to be advised concerning each separate item, because he is now trained to meet his problem as a whole; for he knows not merely how he should live with his wife or his son, but how he should live aright.


Legacy
Aristo came to be regarded as a marginal figure in the history of Stoicism, but in his day, he was an important philosopher whose lectures drew large crowds.  Eratosthenes, who lived in Athens as a young man, claimed that Aristo and Arcesilaus were the two most important philosophers of his age.  But it was the more moderate Zeno, not the radical Aristo, whose views would win out.  Chrysippus, (head of the Stoic school from c. 232 to c. 206 BC), systemized Stoicism along the lines set down by Zeno, and in doing so, was forced to repeatedly attack Aristo:

To maintain that the only Good is Moral Worth is to do away with the care of one's health, the management of one's estate, participation in politics, the conduct of affairs, the duties of life; nay, to abandon that Moral Worth itself, which according to you is the be-all and the end-all of existence; objections that were urged most earnestly against Aristo by Chrysippus.
And yet, Aristo never quite went away, as can be seen by the repeated references to his views by later writers. By outlining a version of Stoicism rooted in Cynic philosophy, he provided fruitful food for thought for both the supporters and the opponents of Stoicism ever since.


Notes


References
Holiday, Ryan; Hanselman, Stephen (2020). "Aristo the Challenger". Lives of the Stoics. New York: Portfolio/Penguin. pp. 26–36. ISBN 978-0525541875.
Inwood, B., The Cambridge Companion to the Stoics. Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
 Laërtius, Diogenes. "The Stoics: Ariston" . Lives of the Eminent Philosophers. Vol. 2:7. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.
 Laërtius, Diogenes. "The Academics: Arcesilaus" . Lives of the Eminent Philosophers. Vol. 1:4. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.
Long, A., Sedley, D., The Hellenistic Philosophers. Volume 1. Cambridge University Press, 1987. 
Nicholson, Aikin, Enfield, Morgan, Johnston, General Biography: Or, Lives, Critical and Historical, of the Most Eminent Persons. 1799. 
Porter, J., The Philosophy of Aristo of Chios. In The Cynics: The Cynic Movement in Antiquity and Its Legacy. (ed. Branham and Goulet-Cazé), Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996, pp. 156–189. 
 Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Ariston". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. pp. 310–311.


External links

Seneca the Younger,  Letter 94, On the value of advice. Seneca's translation (or paraphrase) of Aristo's views (§5–17), followed by Seneca's riposte.
The New von Arnim Project, Dir. Christian Vassallo, University of Turin, https://sites.google.com/unito.it/newvonarnim-apathes/home-page
Greek testimonies for Aristo of Chios at Eulogikon

Aristote Lusinga (born 20 February 1990) is a retired French professional footballer who played as a centre-back.


Club career
Lusinga was born in the commune of Dervallières, a suburb of Nantes. He joined his hometown club FC Nantes in 1998. During his time in the youth system, he excelled and earned caps with France's under-15 side and the under-16 side making his debut in the Tournio de Montaigu. On 28 May 2008, he signed his first professional contract with, agreeing to a three-year deal with Nantes.
In June 2018, he returned to Nantes to helps the youngs in the reserve team.


Controversy
On 17 May 2008, Lusinga was involved in an incident on the final day of the 2007–08 CFA season, while playing with the FC Nantes Reserves, against US Orléans. After receiving a yellow card, from referee Stéphane Jochem, in the 42nd minute, Lusinga would later be cautioned again, prompting a send off. After having words, a very irritated Lusinga headbutted Jochem. Following the match, Lusinga apologized and later sent an apology to the French Football Federation. Despite the remorse, the FFF suspended him from football for a period of two years, with one year being suspended. He was still allowed to train with the club.
Lusinga made his return a year later on 23 May 2009 in a CFA 2 match against US Avranches. He made his league debut a week later on the final match day of the season against Auxerre appearing as a substitute in the 89th minute. Nantes won the match 2–1, but still suffered relegation back to Ligue 2.


Personal life
Lusinga is of Angolan descent.


References


External links
Aristote Lusinga at Soccerway
"LFP Profile (lfp.fr)". Archived from the original on 29 December 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)
"FC Nantes Website Profile (fcnantes.com)". Archived from the original on 29 May 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2009.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)

Arthur Durrant Brown (1926–2011) was a Canadian suffragan bishop.
Brown was educated at the University of Western Ontario  and ordained in 1950. After a curacy in Pinkerton, Ontario  he held incumbencies at St Stephen, London, St JohnWindsor and St Michael, Toronto. He was Archdeacon of York, ON from 1974 to 1981 when he became Suffragan Bishop for the Diocese of Toronto.


References

Arthur Frederic Clarke  (22 December  1848 – 4 January 1932) was an eminent Anglican priest in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
He was educated at Charterhouse and Trinity College, Oxford.  He was ordained in 1874. After curacies at  Beverley, Linthorpe, Alvechurch   and   Leek Wootton he was Vicar of Cockerham from 1881 until 1905; and Archdeacon of Lancaster from 1896 to 1905. He was then Vicar of Rochdale from 1905 to 1910; its Rural Dean from 1905 to 1910; and its Archdeacon from 1910 to 1919. During this period he was also an honorary chaplain to the forces.
A bell at St Andrew, Singapore is dedicated to him.


References

Artsvanik (Armenian: Արծվանիկ) is a village in the Kapan Municipality of the Syunik Province in Armenia.


Etymology
The village has previously been known as Yeritsvanik, Yeritsvank’, Yertsu Vank’, Karmir Vank’, Yerets’, Yerets and Yeretsvanik.


Demographics
In 1908, Artsvanik (Russian: Арцеваник) had a predominantly Armenian population of 952 within the Zangezur Uyezd of the Elisabethpol Governorate of the Russian Empire.
The Statistical Committee of Armenia reported its population as 578 in 2010, down from 652 at the 2001 census.


Gallery


References

The Ashit (Russian: Ашит; Tatar: Ашыт [ʌˈʂɯt]) is a river in Tatarstan and Mari El, Russian Federation, a left-bank tributary of the Ilet. It is 89 kilometres (55 mi) long, and its drainage basin covers 1,065 square kilometres (411 mi2).
Major tributaries are the Ura, Semit, Shashi, Urtemka, and Ilinka. The maximal mineralization 450 mg/L. The average sediment deposition at the river mouth per year is 180 millimetres (7.1 in). Drainage is regulated. The lower part of the valley is swamped. The villages Alat and Bolshaya Atnya are in the river valley.


References

The Australian Submarine Agency (ASA), formerly the Nuclear-Powered Submarine Task Force (NPSTF) is the federal statutory agency of the Commonwealth Government responsible for guiding Australia’s nuclear-powered submarine program. The ASA was established in July 2023 as a non-corporate Commonwealth entity under the Department of Defence consisting of defence personnel and Australian public servants.


Organisation
Personnel will be based across Australia as well as in the United Kingdom and the United States, numbering 350 increasing to 680 within the following year. The ASA's expected budget in the 2024-25 Budget was A$243.4 million in 2023-24, increasing to A$527.4 million in 2026-27.


Leadership


Director-General


Nuclear Submarine Capability


Responsibilities


Submarine acquisition
The role of the ASA is to support Australia's acquisition of nuclear-powered submarines. The acquisition, through the AUKUS partnership, will include three Virginia-class and five SSN-AUKUS submarines. USS Delaware (SSN-791) and USS New Jersey (SSN-796) are likely to be the two existing United States Navy fleet units that will transferred to the Royal Australian Navy, with the third vessel being a new build.


Submarine construction
The ASA will be the lead agency for nuclear vessel construction, with the Osborne Naval Shipyard designated as the preferred location for the construction of nuclear submarines in Australia. Five Australian SSN-AUKUS submarines will be built in South Australia as part of the arrangement with an undetermined amount of the same design to be built by BAE Systems Submarines for the Royal Navy.


Nuclear vessel support
As part of the transition from diesel-electric to nuclear-powered submarines, the Royal Australian Navy will be using one Royal Navy and four United States Navy submarines stationed at HMAS Stirling on a rotational basis under the name Submarine Rotational Force – West (SRF-West).


See also

Nuclear power in Australia


References


Sources
Defence Portfolio Budget Statements 2025-26 (Report). Canberra: Department of Defence. 2025. Retrieved 6 December 2025.


External links
Australian Submarine Agency official website

B'nei Moshe (Hebrew: בני משה, "Children of Moses", variously transliterated as Bnai Moshe, Benei Moshe, Bene Mosheh, etc.) was a Zionist organization. It was established as a secret organization in Odessa in 1889 on the day Seventh of Adar, which is considered the day of death and birth of Moses. While its originator was Yehoshua Barzillai (Eisenstadt), Ahad Ha'am was persuaded to take leadership of the organization. Its ideology was described as "cultural Zionism", as opposed to the political Zionism.
In 1893, its headquarters were moved to Jaffa and it ceased to be secretive. It was suggested that it become a political party, however, internal controversies and frustration led to its disestablishment in 1897.
Its membership was about 160 persons. Its major practical achievements include improvements in Hebrew education, in particular, establishing modernized heders (heder metukkan); helping in establishing the Rehovot settlement, and establishing a Hebrew publishing house Ahi'asaf in Warsaw, the first one of the kind. It published the annual Ahi'asaf Tablet (Hebrew: לוח אחיאסף) almanac (1893–1904) by a large group of writers and intellectuals, members of B'nei Moshe, from many different fields.


Notable members
Ahad Ha'am
Chaim Weizmann
Avraham Freidenberg, lawyer, educator, Zionist activist, and literary editor, He headed B'nei Moshe in Kremenchuk after he was appointed "crown rabbi" there
Avraham Moshe Bernstein, hazzan, choirmeister, composer, musicologist, writer. Member of B'nei Moshe since 1899. His music was popular in B'nei Moshe.
Ben-Avigdor (Abraham Leib Shelkovich), writer, secretary of B'nei Moshe in Warsaw, pioneer of modern Hebrew publishing in Eastern Europe. In particular, he took part in the founding of Ahi'asaf
Hayim Margolis-Kalwariski, agronomist, land purchaser on behalf of the Jewish Colonization Association, secretary of B'nei Moshe in Jaffa
Menachem Ussishkin
Yehoshua Barzillai
Yehuda Gur, linguist, educator, writer, and translator. Together with Barzillai, he edited the B'nei Moshe monthly Mikhtavim me-Erez Yisrael ("Letters from Erez Israel", 1893–94).


References

A Bakezōri (Japanese: 化け草履; literally meaning "ghost-sandal") is a being from Japanese folklore belonging to the group of Yōkai.


Description
The Bakezōri is described as a wandering sandal with two arms and two legs, but only one eye. He is said to spook inhabited households during the night, running around and continuously chanting: "Kararin, kororin, kankororin, managu mittsu ni ha ninmai!" (カラリン、コロリン、カンコロリン、まなぐ三つに歯二ん枚; "Kararin, kororin, kankororin! They have three eyes and two teeth!"). Most possibly he's mocking his "more noble cousins", the famous Geta.


Background
Design model of the Bakezōri may have been Zōri, traditional sandals made of braided rice straw.
The being Bakezōri belongs to a special group of Yōkai, called Tsukumogami (付喪神; "artifact-demons"): According to Japanese folklore, households are like repair tools, kitchen appliances and even clothes of any kind which eventually come to life and receive their own consciousness when ignored or neglected for a long time (mostly after 100 years). Bakezōri are said to be normally harmless to humans, but they can start to rip or pester them. Their motivation is boredom and frustration, or simply revenge and jealousy. Most Bakezōri group up with other animated household stuff or clothes, or they simply leave home and run away.


Sources


External links
Short info about Bake-zori at yokai.com (Japanese)

Barlin (French pronunciation: [baʁlɛ̃]) is a commune in the Pas-de-Calais department in the Hauts-de-France region in northern France.


Geography
A small ex-coal mining town, now a light engineering and farming commune, Barlin is situated 7 miles (11 km) south of Béthune and 30 miles (48 km) southwest of Lille, at the junction of the D57, D179 and the D188 roads.


History
Barlin dates to at least 1141, the year of the first mention of the parish of Barlin in a manuscript now kept in the National Archives. It was then spelt Ballin or Bellin. The name changed several times over the centuries, being recorded as Ballin in 1141, Bellin in 1438 and Barlaing in 1556; it was not until the next century that it became Barlin.
In the 12th century, the territory of Barlin was divided into several lordships that depended on Saint-Pol-sur-Ternoise, Arras or Béthune. In 1207, Thomas Hasbare was seigneur of Barlin. The Melun family succeeded him and one of their lords, nicknamed Le Brun, the king's chamberlain, saw his property confiscated by Duke John the Fearless, who had accused him of allegiance with his enemies. The Duke of Burgundy then donated the land and income of Barlin to Walleran de Juhaucourt.
In the mid-nineteenth century, coalmining began at Barlin, and the town flourished. Its mines closed in the 1960s.
Today, Barlin is a modern and dynamic place that offers its residents numerous amenities: schools, colleges, a swimming pool, a library and sports halls.


Population


Sights
The church of St. Pierre, dating from the eighteenth century
The Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemetery
The museum


See also
Communes of the Pas-de-Calais department


References


External links

Barlin official website (in French)
Barlin schools' website (in French)
The CWGC communal cemetery extension at Barlin

The Bayerischer Verfassungsorden (Bavarian Constitution Order) is an award by the German state Bavaria, which is awarded annually by the Bavarian state parliament to persons who have rendered outstanding services to the Bavarian constitution. It was founded as the Bayerische Verfassungsmedaille, 'Bavarian Constitution Medal' before being upgraded to an order in 2011.
The medal was established on 1 December 1961, donated by the then president of parliament Rudolf Hanauer, as the necessity arose to honour long-serving members of parliament.  The inscription on the medal is "Bayerische Verfassung" (Bavarian constitution) with the Roman year figures MDCCCXVIII (1818), MCMXIX (1919) and MCMXLVI (1946), the obverse shows the Coat of arms of Bavaria. The medal was given in Silver and Gold.
On 20 July 2011, the medal was elevated to the rank of an order.


Recipients

Many politicians received the medal, including Franz Götz and Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger. Members of the Bavarian parliament receive it usually after three legislative periods (formerly 12 years, now 15 years of service), ministers typically after one term (formerly 4 years, now five years). The medal has been awarded also to artists such as ballerina Konstanze Vernon, and clerics such as Joseph Alois Ratzinger, the later pope.


2001
Kurt Faltlhauser
Ingo Friedrich
Erwin Huber


2002
Reinhold Bocklet
Josef Deimer
Franz Götz
Karl Freller


2004
Johannes Friedrich
Christian Ude


2005
Karl Freller
Charlotte Knobloch
Ernst Pöppel


2006
Manfred Christ
Heinz Donhauser
Ernst-Ludwig Winnacker


2007
Otmar Bernhard
Ruth Drexel
Mieczysław Pemper
Gisela Stein
Klaus Dieter Breitschwert
Peter Radtke
Siegfried Schneider (politician)


2008
Herbert Ettengruber
Ingrid Fickler
Heidi Lück
Marion Schick
Jutta Speidel


2009
Dieter Dorn
Max Mannheimer
Horst Seehofer
Ludwig Stiegler
Dieter Borchmeyer
Walter Kolbow
Bernd Posselt


2010
Michael Glos
Theodor W. Hänsch
Gerda Hasselfeldt
Ludwig Schick
Siegfried Schneider
Senta Berger
Renate Dodell
Peter Maffay
Angelika Niebler


2011
Reinhard Marx
Waltraud Meier
Iris Berben
Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler
Peter Landau
Eduard Oswald
Claudia Roth


2012
Franz Beckenbauer
Peter Lerche
Ilse Aigner
Verena Bentele
Max Stadler


2013
Hans-Jürgen Buchner
Mahbuba Maqsoodi
Marcus H. Rosenmüller


2017
Jacques Chagnon
Philipp Lahm


2018
Gerd Müller


2019
Helmut Brunner


2020
Markus Söder


2021
Angela Merkel


2022
Felix Neureuther


2023
Eva-Maria Beck-Meuth
Thomas Müller


2025
Eva Umlauf


References


External links
Informationen des Bayerischen Landtages zur Bayerischen Verfassungsmedaille (in German)

Beach Read is an upcoming American romantic comedy film written and directed by Yulin Kuang, based on the 2020 novel by Emily Henry. It stars Phoebe Dynevor, Patrick Schwarzenegger, Kristin Davis, Tig Notaro, Ella Balinska, Andie MacDowell, and Kevin Bacon.
Beach Read is scheduled to be released in the United States on May 7, 2027, by 20th Century Studios.


Cast
Phoebe Dynevor as January Andrews
Patrick Schwarzenegger as Augustus "Gus" Everett
Andie MacDowell
Kevin Bacon
Kristin Davis
Tig Notaro
Inanna Sarkis
Ella Balinska


Production
In April 2023, it was announced that Emily Henry's novel Beach Read was being adapted into a feature film for 20th Century Studios, with Yulin Kuang set to direct. In February 2026, Phoebe Dynevor joined the cast. In April 2026, Patrick Schwarzenegger joined the cast. Andie MacDowell and Kevin Bacon would be added to the cast in May. In June, Kristin Davis, Tig Notaro, Inanna Sarkis, and Ella Balinska joined the cast.
Filming began in Toronto in June 2026, Kuang revealing this on Instagram. Steve Yedlin serves as cinematographer.


Release
Beach Read is scheduled to be released in the United States on May 7, 2027.


References


External links
Beach Read at IMDb

Beautiful Lady Yu (Chinese: 虞美人; died 179; personal name unknown) held the rank of "beautiful lady" (美人) in the harem of Emperor Shun of Han. She was the biological mother of Liu Sheng (刘生), Grand Princess of Wuyang (舞阳长公主) and Liu Bing, Emperor Chong of Han (汉冲帝刘炳). According to Xu Hanzhi, Lady Yu's father Yu Shi (Chinese: 虞诗) and grandfather Yu Heng (Chinese: 虞衡) were both Han officials.
Lady Yu was chosen to be a concubine at the age of 13 (by East Asian reckoning), on the basis of belonging to a "good family", and her mother's clan members were all honoured and favoured people. Later on she gave birth to her daughter, Liu Sheng. In 138, her daughter Liu Sheng was conferred the title "Grand Princess of Wuyang".
In 143, Lady Yu gave birth to Emperor Shun's only son: Liu Bing. In September 144, following the death of Emperor Shun, Liu Bing became emperor. In February of the following year, Liu Bing died.
When an Emperor ascended the throne, the mother of that Emperor would usually receive an honourable title. Yet, this was not the case for Beautiful Lady Yu. According to Book of the Later Han, due to General Liang Ji's violent seizure of power, Lady Yu's clan feared Liang Ji doing them harm and avoided court positions and honours, and was thus considered simply a "grand family".
On 24 November 175, Emperor Ling of Han honoured Lady Yu as mother of Emperor Chong by bestowing her the higher harem rank "noble lady of Xian hill" (宪园贵人), together with bestowing the title "concubine of Prince Xiao of Bohai" on Lady Chen, mother of Emperor Zhi of Han. Following this, Lady Yu was also known as "Noble Lady Yu of Xianling" (宪陵贵人虞氏). In 179, Lady Yu died, having outlived both her husband and son by more than 30 years.


Footnotes

Before I Go to Sleep is the first novel by S. J. Watson, published in the spring of 2011. It became both a Sunday Times and The New York Times bestseller and has been translated into over 40 languages. It has become a bestseller in France, Canada, Bulgaria and the Netherlands. It reached number 7 on the U.S. bestseller list, the highest position for a debut novel by a British author since J. K. Rowling. The New York Times described the author as an "out-of-nowhere literary sensation". He wrote the novel between shifts whilst working as a National Health Service (NHS) audiologist.


Plot
The novel is a psychological thriller about a woman suffering from anterograde amnesia. She wakes up every day with no knowledge of who she is. The novel follows her as she tries to reconstruct her memories from a journal she has been keeping. She learns that she has been seeing a doctor who is helping her to recover her memory, that her name is Christine Lucas, that she is 47 years old and married and has a son. As her journal grows it casts doubts on the truth behind this knowledge as she determines to discover who she really is.


Reception
John O'Connell writing in The Guardian is full of praise: "it's exceptionally accomplished – like David Nicholls's One Day, a brilliant example of how an unpromisingly high-concept idea can be transformed by skilful execution", "The structure is so dazzling it almost distracts you from the quality of the writing. No question, this is a very literary thriller." and concludes "The most unnerving aspect of Before I Go to Sleep is the way it is rooted in the domestic, the suburban, the trivial. Forget whizz-bang futurism: it proceeds from ordinary life in tiny, terrifying steps, and is all the better for it. The Escher staircase has an oatmeal carpet."
James Kidd of The Independent has minor reservations :"Watson's take on the material is clever, convincing and moreish. Christine's life is mundane, but filled with tantalising possibilities: the early chapters fly by as you wonder exactly who to trust. The fun comes from spotting the plot holes that Watson later exploits for all they're worth." and he concludes "The ending feels hurried; a sentimental postscript to the meticulously plotted main event. But these are minor gripes. Before I Go to Sleep is an enjoyable and impressive first novel."
Craig Ranapia in the New Zealand Listener also has reservations, but concludes that the novel is 'slickly readable': "Watson scrupulously plays fair as he unpicks the tangled web surrounding our heroine, until the denouement. The last section turns on a character’s opportune inattention – after being surreally observant for the previous 300 pages – so the last piece of the puzzle can be uncovered. It was a cheat I couldn’t forgive or forget." but concludes "Before I Go to Sleep is still a slickly readable trip across familiar ground that leaves me looking forward to Watson’s second novel."


Awards
Winner of the 2011 Crime Writers' Association John Creasey (New Blood) Dagger
Winner of the Galaxy National Book Award for Thriller & Crime Novel of the Year, 2011
Winner of the Dutch Crimezone Debut of the Year, 2012
Winner of the French SNCF du polar Prize for best Crime Novel, 2012
Winner of the Crimefest Audible Sounds of Crime Award for Best Unabridged Audiobook, 2012 (read by Susannah Harker)


Publication history
2011, UK, Doubleday, ISBN 0-85752-017-2, Pub date 1 Apr 2011, Hardback
2011, Australia, Text Publishing, ISBN 1921758155, Pub date 2 May 2011, Paperback
2011, US, HarperCollins, ISBN 0-06-206055-4, Pub date 14 Jun 2011, Hardback
2012, UK, Black Swan, ISBN 0-552-16413-5, Pub date 1 Jan 2012, Paperback
2012, UK, Audiobooks, ISBN 1846573688, Pub date 1 Mar 2012, audio (read by Susannah Harker)
2012, US, HarperCollins, ISBN 0-06-206056-2, Pub date, 07 Deb 2011, Paperback


Film adaptation

Ridley Scott acquired the film rights and hired Rowan Joffé as director.
Nicole Kidman leads as Christine Lucas with Colin Firth as her husband. Mark Strong plays Dr Edmund Nash and Anne-Marie Duff plays Christine's friend, Claire. The film was shot in London and at Twickenham Studios.


See also
Mithya
Memento
50 First Dates
Nenu Meeku Telusa? Telugu


References


External links
Official website
Gillespie and I / Jane Harris interview / Before I Go To Sleep | Scottish Book Trust

Bekahdan (Persian: بكهدان, also Romanized as Bekahdān; also known as Bekdūn and Qeshlāq) is a village in Aliabad-e Malek Rural District, in the Central District of Arsanjan County, Fars province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 817, in 190 families.


References

During his long career, American filmmaker Ben Affleck has worked on several projects which never progressed beyond the pre-production stage under his direction. Some of these projects fell in development hell, were officially canceled, were in development limbo or would see life under a different production team.


As director


The Trade
On February 18, 2010, Affleck was set to direct and produce Dave Mandel's screenplay The Trade, with Matt Damon, Sean Bailey, and Jennifer Todd producing and Universal Pictures set to distribute. On May 8, 2014, Jay Roach was set to direct The Trade instead of Affleck.


Tell No One
On June 15, 2011, Affleck was set to direct the film adaptation of Harlen Coben's novel Tell No One with Chris Terrio writing the screenplay, and Frank Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy producing, with Warner Bros. set to distribute in America while Universal Pictures International would distribute the film internationally and EuropaCorp for France. On July 20, 2017, F. Scott Frazier was hired to write a new draft and Affleck was likely no longer attached.


Line of Sight
On August 23, 2011, Affleck was set to direct, produce and possibly star in F. Scott Frazier's action thriller screenplay Line of Sight, with Joel Silver, Alex Heineman and Andrew Rona producing, and Warner Bros. set to distribute. On December 19, 2012, Mouse McCoy was set to direct Line of Sight instead of Affleck.


The Middle Man TV pilot
On September 13, 2013, Affleck was set to direct the pilot episode and produce The Middle Man, a crime drama written by Glenn Gordon Caron, Michael Yebba and Emilio Mauro, with Caron also attached as the showrunner and producer with Chay Carter, and Fox giving a pilot order. On January 24, 2014, the pilot was put on pause due to Affleck's schedule for Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice.


Untitled action thriller film
On October 25, 2013, Affleck was set to direct, produce and possibly star in Will Staples' action thriller screenplay about mercenaries killing an African warlord, with Matt Damon and Jennifer Todd producing and Warner Bros. set to distribute.


The Batman


Witness for the Prosecution
On August 19, 2016, Affleck was hired to direct and produce a new adaptation of the Agatha Christie novel The Witness for the Prosecution, with Christopher Keyser writing the screenplay, and Jennifer Todd, Matt Damon and Christie's estate producing, 20th Century Fox distributing.


Untitled McDonald's Monopoly film


Ghost Army
On April 23, 2019, Affleck was hired to direct, produce and star in Ghost Army, the World War II film adaptation of Rick Beyer and Elizabeth Sayles novel The Ghost Army of World War II: How One Top-Secret Unit Deceived the Enemy with Inflatable Tanks, Sound Effects, and Other Audacious Fakery, with Nic Pizzolatto writing the screenplay, Andrew Lazar and Madison Ainley producing and Universal Pictures distributing.


King Leopold's Ghost
On November 21, 2019, Affleck was hired to direct and produce the feature film adaptation of Adam Hochschild's novel King Leopold's Ghost, with Farhad Safinia writing the screenplay, Martin Scorsese, Emma Koskoff-Tillinger, Harry Belafonte, Gina Belafonte and Madison Ainley producing the film and One Community financing.


The Big Goodbye
On August 7, 2020, Affleck was set to direct, write and produce a film about the making of Chinatown based on Sam Wasson's The Big Goodbye: Chinatown and the Last Years of Hollywood, with Lorne Michaels producing, and Paramount Pictures set to distribute.


Keepers of the Lost Cities


As producer


The Blade Itself


Father Daughter Time
On May 6, 2011, Affleck was set to produce Matt Damon's directorial debut Father Daughter Time and potentially star from a spec script from Matthew Aldrich, Chris Moore and Drew Vinton producing and Warner Bros. distributing. On January 9, 2017, Gavin O'Connor set to direct instead of Damon, with Affleck still attached as a producer.


Race to the South Pole
On September 19, 2012, Affleck was set to produce Race to the South Pole along with Matt Damon and Jennifer Todd producing from a pitch by Peter Glanz, Casey Affleck was set to star and Warner Bros set to distribute.


Sleeper


More Time with Family TV series
On October 10, 2013, Affleck was set to produce More Time with Family, a sitcom based on Tom Papa's comedy act, with Papa writing the series with Cathy Yuspa and Josh Goldsmith, Matt Damon producing and CBS giving a pilot order. On February 14, 2014, Alyson Hannigan was cast in the series.


Untitled action adventure film
On December 16, 2013, Affleck was set to produce an action-adventure film from a screenplay written by John Krasinski and Oren Uziel, Jennifer Todd & Matt Damon producing and Warner Bros. distributing.


House of Deceit
On June 26, 2015, Affleck was set to produce the film adaptation of Ken Bensinger's novel House of Deceit with Gavin O'Connor set to direct, Anthony Tambakis writing the screenplay, Guymon Casady, Darin Friedman & Matt Damon producing and Warner Bros. distributing.


The Shadows
On October 12, 2017, Affleck was set to produce The Shadows, a film based on a New Yorker article about the first American undercover police unit, with Chris Bremner writing the screenplay, Matt Damon & Jennifer Todd producing, and Paramount Pictures was set to distribute.


I Am Still Alive
On December 19, 2018, Affleck was set to produce and star in the film adaptation of Kate Alice Marshall's novel I am Still Alive with Lori Evans Taylor writing the screenplay, Pearl Street Films Madison Ainley producing and Universal Pictures distributing.


Power to the People
On November 12, 2019, Affleck was set to executive produce Power to the People, a film about The Black Panther Party founders Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale being investigated by the FBI, with George Tillman Jr. directing, Gregory Allen Howard writing the screenplay, Madison Ainley, Stanley Nelson, Bryan Oh, and Fanshen Cox DiGiovanni producing, and Paramount Pictures was in talks to distribute.


Offers


Arizona
On December 8, 2008, Affleck was offered to direct Arizona, a true crime biopic about the late investigative reporter Don Bolles with Sheldon Turner writing the screenplay and Miramax would distribute.


Replay
On October 19, 2010, Affleck was offered to direct and produce the feature film adaptation of Ken Grimwood's novel Replay, with Jason Smilovac writing the screenplay and Warner Bros. was set to distribute, but Robert Zemeckis and Greg Berlanti actually accepted the deal to direct the feature film adaptation.


Gangster Squad

On December 1, 2010, Affleck was offered  to direct Will Beall's screenplay Gangster Squad, but Ruben Fleischer was hired instead.


Star Wars: Episode 7


Bunker Hill
On March 18, 2013, Affleck was offered to direct and produce the feature film adaptation of Nathaniel Philbrick's historical novel Bunker Hill: A City, a Siege, a Revolution, with Chris Terrio writing the screenplay and Warner Bros. set to distribute. On April 5, 2016, Aaron Stockard was set to write a new draft, while Affleck was still in talks to direct.


American Hustle


The Stand


See also
Ben Affleck filmography


References


External links
Ben Affleck's unrealized projects at IMDb

The Route 10 bridge, also known as Bennett's Meadow Bridge, is a 215.5-metre (707 ft) steel stringer bridge crossing the Connecticut River in the town of Northfield, Massachusetts. The bridge carries state highway Route 10 and was built in 1969.


History
The town of Northfield first authorized a bridge at or near the site of the current bridge in 1810. The bridge was built by a private corporation with the town holding stock. The new bridge was destroyed in a flood after only a few years. A horse boat ferry, known as Bennett's Meadow Ferry, replaced the river crossing. In 1897, the state legislature authorized Franklin County to construct a second bridge at or near the site of the ferry at a cost not to exceed $35,000. The new bridge was designed by Edward Shaw of Boston and was opened to traffic in 1899. The bridge was one of the first bridges erected by a then novel method without the use of false works that has since become standard procedure. The 1899 bridge was later demolished and a third bridge (the current bridge) was constructed just south of the former bridge, resulting also in the slight realignment of the highway.


See also
List of crossings of the Connecticut River


References
Bridge Inventory Record on NationalBridges.com.
Massachusetts Historical Commission, Massachusetts Secretary of the Commonwealth (1982). MHC Reconnaissance Survey Town Report, Northfield (PDF). Boston: Commonwealth of Massachusetts.


External links
HAER report on Schell Bridge, August 1990, which also talks quite a bit about this bridge


Footnotes

Bernard Kester (1928–2018) was an American designer, artist, curator, and writer, known for his pottery and textile design. He was instrumental in the studio craft movement in the United States through his work as a curator and exhibit designer at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, and he worked to elevated craft and fiber works to contemporary art found in museums. Kester founded the fiber art program at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). He was named an honorary fellow by the American Craft Council (ACC) in 1980. 


Biography
Bernard Kester was born on March 25, 1928, in Salt Lake City, Utah. When he was a young child, the family temporarily moved to Newport Beach, California, followed by a move to Long Beach, California. He started making art in kindergarten.
Kester attended the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), and graduated with a BFA degree and MFA degree.
From 1956 to 1991, he taught at UCLA, starting with ceramics and eventually switched to teaching weaving. Kester founded the fiber art program at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Some of Kester’s notable students included Gerhardt Knodel, Maren Hassinger, and Neda Al-Hilali.
Kester worked as a curator and exhibition designer at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art. He worked to elevated craft and fiber art to contemporary art found in museums. His exhibition design work was included in the show, The Legacy of Genghis Khan: Courtly Art and Culture in West Asia, 1256–1353 (2003). 


References


External links
Podcast: Interview of Bernard Kester with Joan Benedetti (2008)

Bernard Michael Shanley (August 4, 1903 – February 25, 1992) was an American lawyer and politician best known for his work with U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower. He served under President Eisenhower as Deputy White House Chief of Staff, Appointments Secretary (1955–1957) and Special Counsel (1953–1955).


Early life and education
Shanley was born in Newark, New Jersey on August 4, 1903 to a prominent family. His grandfather was a wealth contractor who built the Pennsylvania Railroad track to Philadelphia and helped found Public Service Electric and Gas. He attended St. Benedict's Preparatory School in Newark, graduating in 1921. He initially enrolled at the University of Notre Dame on an athletic scholarship but transferred to Columbia University when his father became ill. He graduated from Columbia in 1925; his father died the same year. While at Columbia, he was a roommate, fraternity brother, and baseball teammate of Lou Gehrig. He attended night classes at Fordham University School of Law and graduated in 1928, beginning his legal career in 1929.


Career
In 1933, he formed a partnership named Young & Shanley in Newark, which was renamed Shanley & Fisher after Harold Fisher joined the firm. The firm was later relocated to Morristown, New Jersey. Over the following six decades, it grew to be one of the largest law firms in New Jersey with over 140 lawyers and over 400 employees. After his death, the firm merged with Drinker Biddle & Reath in November 1999. He served as counsel to the state Chamber of Commerce and served on the boards of Public Service Electric and Gas, St. Benedict's School, Cathay Insurance and the Chubb Corporation.
Shanley suspended his legal career from 1942 to 1945 to serve in World War II, attaining the rank of captain. He was a member of the New Jersey Bar and the United States Supreme Court Bar and a fellow of the American Bar Foundation, the American Bar Association, the Essex County and Somerset County Bar Associations, and the American Judicature Society. In 1965, he tried the case Palisades Properties, Inc. v. Brunetti, 44 N.J. 117 (1965), arguing the case of a philanthropist seeking to preserve the skyline of the New Jersey Palisades; the trial was lost but the firm won their appeal to the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
Shanley entered politics in the late 1940s as counsel to the New Jersey Republican State Committee. He also served as chair of the New Jersey Republican Finance Committee and Council of Legal Advisors. He was known as a moderate Republican.


1948 and 1952 presidential campaigns
In 1947 and 1948, he served as New Jersey campaign manager for Harold Stassen's presidential campaign under future Supreme Court Chief Justice Warren E. Burger.
In 1951, Shanley became involved in efforts to draft Dwight D. Eisenhower to run for president as a Republican. While Eisenhower delayed his decision to run, Shanley again backed Stassen as a stalking horse candidate, serving as national manager of the Stassen campaign. Shanley unsuccessfully advised Stassen, who won only his home state of Minnesota, against efforts to campaign as a compromise between Eisenhower and Ohio Senator Robert A. Taft at the 1952 Republican National Convention, leading Stassen to marginalize him within the campaign. At the convention, Shanley, along with Burger, Edward Thye and Walter Judd, maneuvered to have the Minnesota delegation vote for Eisenhower against Stassen's wishes.
After Eisenhower won the nomination, Shanley joined his campaign and accompanied Eisenhower on most campaign stops. He was appointed to manage the scandal surrounding vice presidential nominee Richard Nixon, who was accused of receiving covert funding from supporters via a slush fund, but the project was abandoned after Nixon made his Checkers speech. Shanley also represented the campaign on New York City television, debating W. Averell Harriman and James Farley.


Advisor to President Eisenhower
After Eisenhower won the election, he offered Shanley the position of the Secretary of the Army, but Shanley declined. After Tom Stephens, who had been promised the role of White House Counsel, became Appointments Secretary instead, Shanley served as acting White House Counsel from January to April 1953. He was sworn in as White House Counsel on April 15, 1953 and served until February 19, 1955. As White House Counsel, Shanley managed relations with the independent agencies of the executive branch, which were often in conflict with the Eisenhower administration, having been staffed during the two preceding decades under Democratic administrations. In 1954, he fired Clarence Manion, chair of the Intergovernmental Relations Commission and a supporter of Robert A. Taft.
As Counsel, Shanley also worked with Taft, Secretary of Labor Martin Durkin and labor leader George Meany to amend the Taft–Hartley Act, a sweeping 1947 reform of federal labor regulations. When a draft of the bill was leaked to the press, Shanley was criticized by both labor and business interests. As a result of the leak, Shanley developed a lasting enmity against The Wall Street Journal. He believed the leak came from the office of Senator H. Alexander Smith of New Jersey, who he would later run to succeed. After Taft died in 1950, the efforts to amend the bill were abandoned. Secretary Durkin accused Shanley of sabotaging the reform for anti-labor purposes.
Shanley was promoted to Appointments Secretary in 1955, serving until 1957. He also served as deputy chief of staff under Sherman Adams. As a key Eisenhower aide, Shanley served as a liaison to Congress, the State Department and the military, recommended legislation, helped draft State of the Union addresses, and served on a National Security Council mission to Formosa regarding the islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
In 1957, Shanley declined efforts, led by Peter Frelinghuysen, to draft him to run for Governor of New Jersey against incumbent Robert Meyner.


Republican National Committee and campaigns for United States Senator
After leaving the White House, Shanley launched an unsuccessful bid for United States Senate in 1958, losing the Republican primary to U.S. Representative Robert Kean. In 1960, he was elected as the Republican National Committeeman from New Jersey. He resigned that office to run for Senate again in 1964, winning the Republican nomination but losing to incumbent Senator Pete Williams. He was again elected Republican National Committeeman in 1968 and served resigning until two weeks before his death in 1992. He served as vice chair of the Republican National Committee for the Northeast.


Personal life and death
Shanley married Margaret V. Smith. They had three sons, Seton, Kevin, and Brendan, and two daughters, Maureen and Brigid. Shanley lived on a 69-acre estate, where he raised sheep.
He was awarded the Medal of St. Benedict in 1990 and named a Knight of St. Gregory by Pope John Paul II.
He died in Bernardsville, New Jersey on February 25, 1992 of natural causes following a brief illness.


References


External links
Diaries of Bernard M. Shanley, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
Bernard Shanley Papers(The Monsignor Field Archives & Special Collection Center at Seton Hall University) - Contains the professional and personal papers of Bernard M. Shanley covering his time with the Eisenhower White House and Campaign, through his political campaign and later career as a Republican National Committeeman.

Bertocci is an Italian surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Adam Bertocci (born 1982), American filmmaker.
Aldo Bertocci (1915 – 2004), Italian operatic tenor.
Peter Bertocci (1910–1989), American philosopher

Beserah (Terengganu Malay: Beseroh) is one of the Pahang state legislative assemblies (Malay: Dewan Undangan Negeri, DUN; also known simply as state assembly/state constituency) located in Indera Mahkota (federal constituency), Kuantan District, Pahang, Malaysia and its position between the cities of Kuantan and Chukai with estimated total land area 300 square kilometers about almost same size with Federal Territories of Malaysia and two times larger than Liechtenstein. There are two mukim within this state assembly; mukim Beserah (same name with the DUN) and mukim Sungai Karang.
Initially, Beserah consisted of several traditional villages, including:   

Being located in the northeasternmost narrow coastal strip of Pahang which is bordered by the state of Terengganu to the north and west; majority local people in this area 
are speaking the Terengganu Malay dialect which is make Beserah quite distinctive from other areas of Pahang that used origin dialects of Pahang Malay.
The increase in population has created a structured settlements and among the earliest is Rumah Murah, Taman Beserah and Taman Balok Makmur. Beserah have many fishing villages and is known as a manufacturer and supplier of various products from the sea. Local residents work as fishermen and are also involved in salted fish, anchovies, keropok lekor and other work based on resources from the sea. The famous traditional cuisine in this area is Mee Calong.
Malaysia first's base earth station is located in this area. This station was built near Taman Beserah and was launched by Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman on 6th April 1970.
There was an islet lies off the coast of Beserah that became attraction of tourists who like to picnic and snorkeling known as Pula Ulor in local dialect that can be reached by 10 minutes traveling by a boat from Jeti Al Muneer Sg Ular.
Pahang most important economic sites such as Industrial Park of Gebeng and Kuantan Port also located in Beserah.
The highest point in Beserah is Bukit Tokki (360 meters above sea level). This hill trailhead can be accessed by hikers through Jalan Kampung Darat Sekolah 33.
The people who live on the land side depend on rubber and durian. Paddy was once cultivated in Beserah. Batik cloth companies and small handicraft companies from sea shells and coconut can be found here.


Sources
"Official Portal of Tourism Pahang - Map of Pahang".
"Official Portal of Tourism Pahang - Beserah".
"The Hidden Islet of Kuantan - Pulau Ular".
"Malaysia First Base Earth Station".
"Memoir of First Malaysia Base Earth Station".


External links

Better Nate Than Ever is a 2022 American musical comedy film written and directed by Tim Federle, based on his 2013 novel of the same name. Described as a coming-of-age story involving musical theater and Broadway, the story centers on the titular Nate Foster, played by Rueby Wood in his first film role. Lisa Kudrow, Aria Brooks and Joshua Bassett appear in supporting roles.
Better Nate Than Ever had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood on March 15, 2022, and was released in the United States as a Disney+ original film on April 1. It received generally positive reviews from critics and received eight nominations at the 1st Children's and Family Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Fiction Special, Outstanding Lead Performance for Wood and Outstanding Supporting Performance for Kudrow.
The film was removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023, amidst a Disney+ and Hulu content removal purge as part of a broader cost cutting initiative under Disney CEO Bob Iger. It was, however, re-released on multiple video-on-demand platforms on September 26, 2023.


Plot
Nate Foster is a 13-year-old boy who lives in Pittsburgh and dreams of being a Broadway star. His parents, Rex and Sherrie, are understanding while his older brother Anthony is put off by his odd behavior. At school, Nate is picked on and gets passed over major roles in a school play, but finds solace in his only friend Libby who supports him in his endeavors despite her own stage fright. She informs him that auditions are being held for a Broadway adaptation of Lilo & Stitch, but Nate is unsure whether he can make it. As luck would have it, Nate's parents decide to get away for a while. Anthony uses the opportunity to hang out with his friends while Nate feigns spending the night at Libby's house. Nate and Libby sneak away on a bus to New York City without telling anyone.
Nate and Libby locate where to audition, but are informed that they need a parent or guardian present. By chance, Nate's maternal aunt Heidi, a struggling actress, happens to be there to audition for A Solitary Woman and Nate passes her off as his guardian. While Heidi is happy to see Nate, she decides to do the responsible thing and call Sherrie to inform her sister of her son's whereabouts. Having lost Sherrie's phone number, Heidi is given Libby's number by Nate and is tricked by Nate, making her believe that he has his parents' approval. Nate goes into the audition, but when he tries to show off his knee dancing from Fiddler on the Roof he accidentally rips his pants and humiliates himself. Nate prepares to return to Pittsburgh with Libby, believing that he has failed, but learns he got a callback. Libby cannot bring herself to stay with Nate in New York and admits her feelings for him. Nate gently turns her down by informing her that he does not think of her that way. He stays for the callback which involves giving a monologue that impresses the casting directors.
Not having a place to stay, and needing to earn money, Nate discovers street performers and begins to sing, becoming a TikTok star overnight. He calls Libby, who responds positively to the news before going to the Museum of Natural History to find Heidi, who, while upset that Nate did not return home, gives him a place to stay. Heidi is revealed to have had a falling out with her sister in the past due to their clashing dreams. She nevertheless supports Nate's endeavors and hopes that he will make the audition. Back at home, Anthony discovers Nate's TikTok video and heads over to Libby's house to demand an explanation for what is happening. In the morning, Anthony and Libby arrive at Heidi's apartment in New York to pick Nate up. Nate tells Anthony that he is aware that he embarrasses him, but that he needs to go to the audition to achieve his dream. He escapes out a fire exit (something he has always wanted to do) while Heidi informs Libby about being an agent.
Nate arrives to audition for Stitch and feels embarrassed when the other auditioners laugh at him for reading all the characters' lines in the script instead of just Stitch's as originally required. He begins to sing "No One Gets Left Behind", but stumbles when Heidi, Anthony and Libby arrive and gives up. Anthony shouts that Nate does not embarrass him, which encourages Nate to continue singing and give a remarkable performance. Nate makes up with Anthony, who found his audition impressive. Nate also encourages Heidi to not give up on her dreams and to make up with Sherrie. On the drive back home, Anthony gets into show tunes and Libby accepts being Nate's platonic friend. The next day at school, Nate is called into the principal's office where his parents learned what happened and reveal that he successfully landed the part. The movie ends with Nate performing in the musical, with Anthony, Libby, Heidi, and his parents in the audience, with Sherrie and Heidi having reconciled, and Heidi getting the lead role in A Solitary Woman.


Cast
Rueby Wood as Nate Foster
Aria Brooks as Libby Reneé, a theater kid and Nate's best friend
Joshua Bassett as Anthony Foster, Nate's older brother
Michelle Federer as Sherrie Foster, Nate and Anthony's mother and Heidi's sister
Norbert Leo Butz as Rex Foster, Nate and Anthony's father
Lisa Kudrow as Aunt Heidi, Nate and Anthony's maternal aunt and Sherrie's sister
Brooks Ashmanskas as Casting Director
Priscilla Lopez as Serious Play Casting Director
Krystina Alabado as Assistant Casting Director
Kayla Davion as Assistant Choreographer
Anaseini Katoa as Director
Finn Egan-Liang as Jimmy Madison
Keola Simpson as Garrett Kekoa
Kim Berrios Lin as Stage Mother
Kylie Kuioka as Stage Daughter
George Benson as himself


Production


Development and casting

Lisa Fragner secured the rights to adapt the book into a feature film under Fox Family. In January 2021, The Walt Disney Company had an open casting-call for a film adaptation of Better Nate Than Ever. By March of the same year, it was announced that the film had officially been green-lit, with production scheduled to take place in New York City. The project entered pre-production under the working title Pittsburgh. Tim Federle, author of the original novel series on which the film is based, will serve as writer/director. Marc Platt and Adam Siegel will serve as producers, with Platt co-producing the film under his Marc Platt Productions banner with Walt Disney Pictures.
In June 2021, Lisa Kudrow joined the cast as Nate's aunt Heidi. Primary characters Nate and Libby were also cast, albeit with as-of-yet unnamed actors in the roles. By August of the same year, Norbert Leo Butz joined the cast in a supporting role.
On November 12, 2021, it was announced that Rueby Wood was cast as the main character, Nate Foster. In addition, Joshua Bassett and Aria Brooks were revealed to play Nate's older brother, Anthony Foster and Libby, a fellow theater kid who sneaks off to New York City with Nate.
Federle said that adapting a book he wrote allowed him to make several changes while being faithful to the source material, such as expanding the roles of Libby and Anthony. Due to the film being a Disney production, he chose to change the musical Nate auditions for from a fictional version of the 1982 Steven Spielberg science fiction family film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial to a fictional musical version of the 2002 animated Disney film Lilo & Stitch.


Filming
Principal photography commenced in New York City, in June 2021. Some scenes were also filmed at Archbishop Stepinac High School in White Plains, New York that same month. Filming also took place in the New Amsterdam Theatre in New York City.


Release
Better Nate Than Ever had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre on March 15, 2022, and was released exclusively on Disney+ on April 1, 2022, This film was released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner instead of 20th Century Studios. The film was removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023. In response to backlash surrounding this, it was re-released digitally on multiple platforms including Amazon Prime Video, Vudu and Google Play on September 26, 2023.


Reception


Critical reception
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 83% of 47 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "A modern musical with old-fashioned charm, Better Nate Than Ever hits heartwarming high notes with its joyous message of self-acceptance." Metacritic assigned the film a score of 66 out of 100 based on 6 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.
Courtney Howard of Variety wrote: "As far as sentiments go, the film’s heart is in the right place. It’s LGBT-positive in terms of representation and acts as a love letter to musical artistic expression." Pittsburgh Post-Gazette stated: "Better Nate Than Ever is likely to serve as a charming celebration of young dreamers and how far they’ll go to find a community that fully accepts them." Petrana Radulovic of Polygon gave a positive review, calling it a "delight" that is "an ode to theater kids (and wannabe theater kids) everywhere."  Amy Nicholson of The New York Times praised the performances of the actors and found the script creative, but stated that the movie does not engage explicitly enough with LGBT themes. Jennifer Green of Common Sense Media rated the film 4 out of 5 stars and wrote: "Better Nate Than Ever is a charming tween musical about celebrating differences and following your dreams based on Tim Federle's same-named book. [...] The film has positive messages about staying true to yourself and accepting friends and relatives for who they are, sometimes making personal sacrifices for their benefit." Nell Minow of RogerEbert.com gave the movie a 3,5 out of 4 stars rating, praised the performances of the cast, complimented the humor, and found the film manages to depict a positive render of musicals. Screen Rant reviewed the movie 3 out of 5, writing, "Better Nate Than Ever is full of charm, supportive friendships and familial relationships, and a passionate love of musical theater and these elements work together to create a lovely, entertaining viewing experience." Jason Struss of Digital Trends wrote: "In the slight but exhaustingly charming Disney+ original movie [...] Better Nate Than Ever is ultimately a throwaway movie, fine enough for kids and bearable for parents, and it isn’t particularly notable."


Accolades


Notes


References


External links
Official website 
Better Nate Than Ever at IMDb 
Better Nate Than Ever on Instagram
Better Nate Than Ever on Twitter

William McQuiston, also known as "Twister", is an Ulster loyalist, who was a high-ranking member of the Ulster Defence Association (UDA). Leader of the organisation's A Company, Highfield, West Belfast Brigade, McQuiston spent more than 12 years in HM Prison Maze outside Lisburn for possession of weapons. He is now a community activist, often working with former members of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) in West Belfast's troubled interface areas where adjoining loyalist and republican communities occasionally clash.


Ulster Defence Association
McQuiston was born and raised in west Belfast's staunchly loyalist and Protestant Shankill Road area. Billy McQuiston joined the junior wing of the UDA immediately after  the 1971 Balmoral Furniture Company bombing, with his decision also influenced by his father having been UDA commander in the area at the time. He recalls: "The area I came from, the family that I came from and the activity that was going on in that area, I don’t think I really had any other choice." He was almost 15 at the time the bomb exploded on a Saturday afternoon in the heart of the Shankill, which was crowded with shoppers. The bomb killed two adult men and two babies. McQuiston was with a friend and they were on their way to the city centre; the boys rushed to the scene and saw the bodies of the infants as they were brought out of the rubble, wrapped in sheets. The following evening he and several friends attended a meeting of the local UDA. One at a time, the teenaged boys were brought into a room by two men wearing hoods. McQuiston faced three men seated at a table on which rested a Bible, gun and an Ulster Banner. After being asked his motive for wishing to join the UDA, he repeated an oath with one hand upon the Bible and the other the gun, and was duly sworn in as a member of the "Ulster Young Militants" (UYM), the junior wing of the UDA.
He became the leader of the UDA's A Company, Highfield, West Belfast Brigade. Described by journalist David Lister as "stocky, and impish-faced", the five feet four McQuiston had a reputation among the UDA as a "messer", which is Belfast slang for a practical joker.
He was first sent to prison on the evidence of a supergrass. He spent 31 days on hunger strike in 1982. He was released in the mid-1980s and it was during this period that he became acquainted with the British agent Brian Nelson, who had infiltrated the UDA. McQuiston was soon sent back to the Maze Prison after being caught in Portadown with masks, hoods, and weapons. Upon his release in 1991, he survived an assassination attempt by the IRA who had broken down his door with a sledgehammer and tried to shoot him with an AK-47. He evaded his attackers by escaping through his loft. In an interview with journalist Peter Taylor in the 1990s, he stated that he had not been overly perturbed by the attempt on his life. He offered the following explanation for his nonchalance

It's a war. I'm a soldier in the UDA so I'm entitled to be shot at now and again. I think I was extremely lucky.
On 23 October 1993, he was on the Shankill Road conducting business for the Loyalist Prisoners' Association (LPA). He had just gone into a pub when an IRA bomb went off in a fish shop below the LPA headquarters where it was believed senior UDA members, including Ulster Freedom Fighters (UFF) brigadier Johnny Adair, were having a meeting. The IRA's intelligence was faulty and the meeting had been cancelled; instead of wiping out Adair and his comrades, 10 people were killed in the shop below, including two children, the shop's owner, and his daughter, low-rank UDA member Michael Morrison, and Thomas Begley, one of the bombers. McQuiston helped pull the dead and wounded from the devastated building.


Role in Adair feud
McQuiston remained a popular and influential figure in Highfield, a loyalist estate located on the Upper Shankill and near the republican Ballymurphy area. In 2003, the UDA's South Belfast brigadier Jackie McDonald contacted McQuiston shortly after the murder of South-East Antrim brigadier John "Grugg" Gregg to secure Twister's aid in avoiding too much bloodshed in an operation to remove Johnny Adair, who was held responsible for Gregg's killing. McQuiston helped to ensure that A and B companies of the West Belfast brigade, covering the Highfield and Woodvale areas, agreed not to oppose McDonald's operations in the lower Shankill whilst McQuiston was also put in charge of a scheme at the Shankill's Heather Street Social Club where members of the lower Shankill C Company could attend to break from Adair and return to the mainstream UDA. Mo Courtney was amongst the leading figures to take this opportunity.


Subsequent activities
Since leaving the UDA, McQuiston has worked as a community activist for the Springfield Intercommunity Development Project. He works alongside former IRA members in troubled interface areas near the west Belfast Peace Line where loyalists and republicans sometimes clash, especially during the annual 12 July Orange Order parades which commemorate the Battle of the Boyne. This was particularly noted in the summer of 2003 when a relatively calm marching season followed at the interfaces of north and west Belfast as a result of co-operation between McQuiston and his Provisional IRA counterpart Sean "Spike" Murray. He is also a member of the UDA's political advisory group, the Ulster Political Research Group (UPRG).


References

Bjarki can be a masculine given name or a middle name. Notable people with the name include:


Given name
Bjarki Steinn Bjarkason (born 2000), Icelandic football winger
Bjarki Már Elísson (born 1990), Icelandic handball player
Bjarki Már Gunnarsson (born 1988), Icelandic handball player
Bjarki Gunnlaugsson (born 1973), Icelandic football midfielder
Bjarki Karlsson, Icelandic poet
Bjarki Nielsen (born 1998), Faroese footballer
Bjarki Sigurðsson (born 1967), Icelandic handball player and coach


Middle name
Viktor Bjarki Arnarsson (born 1983), Icelandic football midfielder
Viktor Bjarki Daðason (born 2008), Icelandic football forward
Jón Bjarki Magnússon, Icelandic journalist


See also
Bödvar Bjarki, legendary hero in Norse mythology

The Black Music Action Coalition (BMAC) is a Black activist organization. American record label executive Courtney Stewart was a founding member and serves on the executive committee for the nonprofit formed in 2020 to combat systemic racism in the music industry. American entertainment lawyer and artist rights advocate Dina LaPolt is also an active member on the Executive Leadership Council. Willie “Prophet” Stiggers, is co-founder, president, and CEO. 
In April 2021, American country music singer/songwriter Morgan Wallen donated $300,000 to the Black Music Action Coalition in the names of 20 people who had counseled him following some "dumb stuff". Those individuals were given the option to funnel their respective $15,000 donations to a charity of their choice or keep the money within the BMAC.
In 2021, BMAC and hip hop music festival Rolling Loud partnered to promote social justice initiatives. In 2023, Rolling Loud hosted a panel discussion in support of their Restoring Artistic Protections (RAP) Act initiative on the first day of Rolling Loud Miami. The panel included Stiggers for BMAC, Rolling Loud co-founder Tariq Cherif, and congressmen Hank Johnson and Jamaal Bowman. The act was introduced as a way to protect artists' creative expression, which has been used against them as evidence in court.
Regarding Tennessee's ELVIS Act, Stiggers said: "Black Music Action Coalition supports this first-of-its-kind legislation, as the misuse of AI could devastate Black music creators who already face an uphill battle. Our priority is to amplify the larger justice movement in the music industry, and we commend Tennessee for setting the standard in AI protection legislation. We hope to see other states follow in Tennessee’s lead in order to protect the creative community."


Music in Action awards
The Black Music Action Coalition's inaugural Music in Action Awards were presented in 2021 by The Weeknd.  That year LaPolt herself was honored for her Black community activism as the recipient of BMAC's Agent of Change Award, alongside civil rights attorney Benjamin Crump. The Weeknd received the Quincy Jones Humanitarian Award.


References

In physics, black hole thermodynamics is a set of physical relationships between the properties of black holes that stands in direct relationship to classical laws of thermodynamics. The equivalence is developed by replacing entropy with black hole horizon area and replacing temperature with black hole horizon surface gravity. Having temperature implies that a black hole must emit radiation, that is, Hawking radiation.
There is no known way to verify black hole thermodynamics; it is the most widely accepted physical model that combines general relativity, quantum field theory, and thermodynamics, though Hawking's area law has already been tested by analyzing gravitational waves.


History
In 1972, Jacob Bekenstein conjectured that black holes should have an entropy proportional to the area of the event horizon, where by the same year, he proposed the no-hair theorem. In 1973 Bekenstein heuristically suggested 
  
    
      
        
          
            
              ln
              ⁡
              
                2
              
            
            
              8
               
              
              π
            
          
        
        ≈
        0.0276
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {\ln {2}}{8\ \!\pi }}\approx 0.0276}
  
 as the constant of proportionality. The next year, in 1974, Stephen Hawking showed that black holes emit thermal Hawking radiation corresponding to a certain temperature (Hawking temperature). Using the thermodynamic relationship between energy, temperature and entropy, Hawking was able to confirm Bekenstein's conjecture and fix the constant of proportionality at 
  
    
      
        1
        
          /
        
        4
      
    
    {\displaystyle 1/4}
  
:

  
    
      
        
          S
          
            BH
          
        
        =
        
          
            
              
                k
                
                  B
                
              
              A
            
            
              4
              
                
                  
                    ℓ
                    
                      P
                    
                  
                
                
                  2
                
              
            
          
        
        ,
      
    
    {\displaystyle S_{\text{BH}}={\frac {k_{\text{B}}A}{4{\ell _{\text{P}}}^{2}}},}
  

where 
  
    
      
        A
      
    
    {\displaystyle A}
  
 is the area of the event horizon, 
  
    
      
        
          k
          
            B
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle k_{\text{B}}}
  
 is the Boltzmann constant, and 
  
    
      
        
          ℓ
          
            P
          
        
        =
        
          
            G
            ℏ
            
              /
            
            
              c
              
                3
              
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \ell _{\text{P}}={\sqrt {G\hbar /c^{3}}}}
  
 is the Planck length.
This is often referred to as the Bekenstein–Hawking formula. The subscript BH either stands for black hole or Bekenstein–Hawking. The fact that the black hole entropy is also the maximal entropy that can be obtained by the Bekenstein bound (wherein the Bekenstein bound becomes an equality) was the main observation that led to the holographic principle. This area relationship was generalized to arbitrary regions via the Ryu–Takayanagi formula, which relates the entanglement entropy of a boundary conformal field theory to a specific surface in its dual gravitational theory.
In the early 1990s Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind generalized the relationship between a black hole's surface area and its entropy, applying to all of spacetime. This was an early form of the holographic principle, a universal relationship between geometry and information. The idea is that the area surrounding any volume in spacetime limits the information content of the volume. Thus the number of degrees of freedom in any volume is bounded and not infinite.
Although Hawking's calculations gave further thermodynamic evidence for black hole entropy, until 1995 no one was able to make a controlled calculation of black hole entropy based on statistical mechanics, which associates entropy with a large number of microstates. Some work, called no-hair theorems, suggested that black holes could have only a single microstate. The situation changed in 1995 when Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa calculated the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy of a supersymmetric black hole in string theory, using methods based on D-branes and string duality. Their calculation was followed by many similar computations of entropy of large classes of other extremal and near-extremal black holes, and the result always agreed with the Bekenstein–Hawking formula. However, for the Schwarzschild black hole, viewed as the furthest-from-extremal black hole, the relationship between micro- and macrostates has not been characterized. Efforts to develop an adequate answer within the framework of string theory continue.
In loop quantum gravity (LQG) it is possible to associate a geometrical interpretation with the microstates: these are the quantum geometries of the horizon. LQG offers a geometric explanation of the finiteness of the entropy and of the proportionality of the area of the horizon. It is possible to derive, from the covariant formulation of full quantum theory (spin foam), the correct relation between energy and area (first law), the Unruh temperature and the distribution that yields Hawking entropy. The calculation makes use of the notion of dynamical horizon and is done for non-extremal black holes. There seems to be also discussed the calculation of Bekenstein–Hawking entropy from the point of view of LQG. The current accepted microstate ensemble for black holes is the microcanonical ensemble. The partition function for black holes results in a negative heat capacity. In canonical ensembles, there is limitation for a positive heat capacity, whereas microcanonical ensembles can exist at a negative heat capacity.
Analyses of gravitational waves emitted by GW250114 confirmed Hawking's assertion that the surface area of a black hole is a non-decreasing function of time.


Laws of classical black hole mechanics
These four laws of black hole mechanics are relationships between physical properties of black holes assuming general relativity but no quantum effects. This form is analogous to the laws of thermodynamics but without quantum effects the black hole temperature must be zero and simply absorbs all radiation. This is the form proposed by Bardeen, Brandon Carter, and Hawking in 1973 (expressed in geometrized units).


Zeroth law
For a stationary black hole (one in mechanical equilibrium)
the surface gravity, 
  
    
      
        κ
      
    
    {\displaystyle \kappa }
  
, is constant on the event horizon. This is the analog of the zeroth law of thermodynamics on the equivalence of temperature across a system at equilibrium with surface gravity being analogous to temperature.


First law
For perturbations of stationary black holes, the change of energy is related to change of area, angular momentum, and electric charge by

  
    
      
        d
        E
        =
        
          
            κ
            
              8
              π
            
          
        
        
        d
        A
        +
        Ω
        
        d
        J
        +
        Φ
        
        d
        Q
        ,
      
    
    {\displaystyle dE={\frac {\kappa }{8\pi }}\,dA+\Omega \,dJ+\Phi \,dQ,}
  

where 
  
    
      
        E
      
    
    {\displaystyle E}
  
 is the energy, 
  
    
      
        κ
      
    
    {\displaystyle \kappa }
  
 is the surface gravity, 
  
    
      
        A
      
    
    {\displaystyle A}
  
 is the horizon area, 
  
    
      
        Ω
      
    
    {\displaystyle \Omega }
  
 is the angular velocity, 
  
    
      
        J
      
    
    {\displaystyle J}
  
 is the angular momentum, 
  
    
      
        Φ
      
    
    {\displaystyle \Phi }
  
 is the electrostatic potential and 
  
    
      
        Q
      
    
    {\displaystyle Q}
  
 is the electric charge.  Analogously, the first law of thermodynamics is a statement of energy conservation, which contains on its right side a term equal to temperature times change in entropy, 
  
    
      
        T
        d
        S
      
    
    {\displaystyle TdS}
  
.


Second law
The horizon area is, assuming the weak energy condition, a non-decreasing function of time:

  
    
      
        
          
            
              d
              A
            
            
              d
              t
            
          
        
        ≥
        0.
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {dA}{dt}}\geq 0.}
  

Here black hole surface area is analogous to thermodynamic entropy and the laws say these properties can never spontaneously decrease.


Third law
It is not possible to form a black hole with vanishing surface gravity. That is, 
  
    
      
        κ
        =
        0
      
    
    {\displaystyle \kappa =0}
  
 cannot be achieved.
This is analogous to some but not all forms of the third law of thermodynamics.


Quantum effects
The generalized second law of thermodynamics (GSL) is needed to present the second law of thermodynamics as valid. This is because the second law of thermodynamics, as a result of the disappearance of entropy near the exterior of black holes, is not useful. The GSL allows for the application of the law because it allows for the measurement of interior, common entropy. The validity of the GSL can be established by studying an example, such as looking at a system having entropy that falls into a bigger, non-moving black hole, and establishing upper and lower entropy bounds for the increase in the black hole entropy and entropy of the system, respectively. The GSL also holds for theories of gravity such as general relativity, Lovelock gravity, or braneworld gravity, because the conditions to use it for these theories can be met.
However, on the topic of black hole formation, the question becomes whether or not the generalized second law of thermodynamics will be valid, and if it is, it will have been proved valid for all situations. Because black hole formation is not a stationary event, proving that the GSL holds is difficult. Proving it is generally valid would require quantum-statistical mechanics, because the GSL is both a quantum and statistical law. This discipline does not exist so the GSL can be assumed to be useful in general, as well as for prediction. For example, one can use the GSL to predict that, for a cold, non-rotating assembly of 
  
    
      
        N
      
    
    {\displaystyle N}
  
 nucleons, 
  
    
      
        
          S
          
            BH
          
        
        −
        S
        >
        0
      
    
    {\displaystyle S_{\text{BH}}-S>0}
  
, where 
  
    
      
        
          S
          
            BH
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle S_{\text{BH}}}
  
 is the entropy of a black hole and 
  
    
      
        S
      
    
    {\displaystyle S}
  
 is the sum of the ordinary entropy.


Third law
The third law of black hole thermodynamics is controversial. Specific counterexamples called extremal black holes fail to obey the rule. The classical third law of thermodynamics, or Nernst's theorem, which says the entropy of a system must go to zero as the temperature goes to absolute zero, is also not a universal law. However, systems that fail the classical third law have not been realized in practice, leading to the suggestion that the extremal black holes may not represent the physics of black holes generally.
A weaker form of the classical third law known as the unattainability principle states that an infinite number of steps are required to put a system into its ground state. This form of the third law does have an analog in black hole physics.


Interpretation of the laws
The four laws of black hole mechanics suggest that one should identify the surface gravity of a black hole with temperature and the area of the event horizon with entropy, at least up to some multiplicative constants. If black holes are only considered classically, then they have zero temperature, and by the no-hair theorem, zero entropy, and the laws of black hole mechanics remain an analogy. However, when quantum-mechanical effects are taken into account, it is found that black holes emit thermal radiation (Hawking radiation) at the Hawking temperature

  
    
      
        
          T
          
            H
          
        
        =
        
          
            κ
            
              2
              π
            
          
        
        .
      
    
    {\displaystyle T_{\text{H}}={\frac {\kappa }{2\pi }}.}
  

From the first law of black hole mechanics, this determines the multiplicative constant of the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy, which is (in geometrized units)

  
    
      
        
          S
          
            BH
          
        
        =
        
          
            A
            4
          
        
        .
      
    
    {\displaystyle S_{\text{BH}}={\frac {A}{4}}.}
  

which is the entropy of the black hole in Einstein's general relativity. Quantum field theory in curved spacetime can be utilized to calculate the entropy for a black hole in any covariant theory for gravity, known as the Wald entropy.


Critique
While black hole thermodynamics (BHT) has been regarded as one of the deepest clues to a quantum theory of gravity, there remains criticism that "the analogy is not nearly as good as is commonly supposed", that it "is often based on a kind of caricature of thermodynamics" and "it's unclear what the systems in BHT are supposed to be".
Others have come to the opposite conclusion believing, "stationary black holes are not analogous to thermodynamic systems: they are thermodynamic systems, in the fullest sense."


See also
Joseph Polchinski
Robert Wald


References


Further reading
Hawking, Stephen W. (1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature. 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030a0. S2CID 4290107.
Hawking, Stephen W.; Ellis, G. F. R. (1973). The Large Scale Structure of Space–Time. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-09906-6.
Hawking, Stephen W. (1994). "The Nature of Space and Time". arXiv:hep-th/9409195.
't Hooft, Gerardus (1985). "On the quantum structure of a black hole" (PDF). Nuclear Physics B. 256: 727–745. Bibcode:1985NuPhB.256..727T. doi:10.1016/0550-3213(85)90418-3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-26.
Page, Don (2005). "Hawking Radiation and Black Hole Thermodynamics". New Journal of Physics. 7 (1): 203. arXiv:hep-th/0409024. Bibcode:2005NJPh....7..203P. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/7/1/203. S2CID 119047329.


External links

Bekenstein-Hawking entropy on Scholarpedia
Black Hole Thermodynamics
Black hole entropy on arxiv.org

In astrophysics, the Bondi accretion, named after Hermann Bondi, is spherical accretion onto a compact object traveling through the interstellar medium. It is generally used in the context of neutron star and black hole accretion. To achieve an approximate form of the Bondi accretion rate, accretion is assumed to occur at a rate 

  
    
      
        
          
            
              M
              ˙
            
          
        
        ≃
        π
        
          R
          
            2
          
        
        ρ
        v
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\dot {M}}\simeq \pi R^{2}\rho v}
  
.
where: 

  
    
      
        ρ
      
    
    {\displaystyle \rho }
  
 is the ambient density

  
    
      
        v
      
    
    {\displaystyle v}
  
 is the object's velocity 
  
    
      
        
          v
          
            o
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle v_{o}}
  
 or the sound speed 
  
    
      
        
          c
          
            s
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle c_{s}}
  
 in the surrounding medium if 
  
    
      
        
          v
          
            o
          
        
        <
        
          c
          
            s
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle v_{o}<c_{s}}
  

  
    
      
        R
      
    
    {\displaystyle R}
  
 is the Bondi radius, defined as 
  
    
      
        2
        G
        M
        
          /
        
        
          c
          
            s
          
          
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle 2GM/c_{s}^{2}}
  
.
The Bondi radius comes from setting escape velocity equal to the sound speed and solving for radius. It represents the boundary between subsonic and supersonic infall. Substituting the Bondi radius in the above equation yields:

  
    
      
        
          
            
              M
              ˙
            
          
        
        ≃
        
          
            
              π
              ρ
              
                G
                
                  2
                
              
              
                M
                
                  2
                
              
            
            
              c
              
                s
              
              
                3
              
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\dot {M}}\simeq {\frac {\pi \rho G^{2}M^{2}}{c_{s}^{3}}}}
  
.
These are only scaling relations rather than rigorous definitions. A more complete solution can be found in Bondi's original work and two other papers.


Application to accreting protoplanets
When a planet is forming in a protoplanetary disk, it needs the gas in the disk to fall into its Bondi sphere in order for the planet to be able to accrete an atmosphere. For a massive enough planet, the initial accreted gas can quickly fill up the Bondi sphere. At this point, the atmosphere must cool and contract (through the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism) for the planet to be able to accrete more of an atmosphere.


Bibliography
Bondi (1952) MNRAS 112, 195, link
Mestel (1954) MNRAS 114, 437,  link
Hoyle and Lyttleton (1941) MNRAS 101, 227


References


See also
Bondi-Hoyle-Lyttleton accretion

Boole is a lunar impact crater that lies along the northwestern limb of the Moon, to the northwest of the crater Gerard. At this location it is viewed nearly from the side, and is very oblong in shape due to foreshortening. The crater formation is nearly circular, however, with a wide inner wall that has been worn and rounded due to subsequent impacts. It can only be observed a day or two before a full moon on a favorable libration.
To the north of Boole is the crater Cremona, and to the southwest are Paneth and Smoluchowski. The eroded and somewhat distorted satellite crater Boole E is attached to the southern rim of Boole, forming a saddle-shaped valley between the two formations. The interior floor of Boole is relatively flat, and marked only by tiny craterlets. There is a small craterlet on the floor next to the southwest rim, and a tiny crater along the western inner wall.
The surface along the western face of Boole is pock-marked by a multitude of small craterlets that run in a northerly direction towards Brianchon. A sequence of these impacts forms a short catena, or crater chain, near the western rim of Boole.
This crater is named after English mathematician George Boole (1815–1864). His name was introduced into lunar nomenclature by David W. G. Arthur and Ewen Whitaker with the Rectified Lunar Atlas (1963). Its designation was officially adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1964.


Satellite craters
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Boole.

Boole B and H include permanently shadowed regions.


References


Sources

Bordier & Cie is a Swiss private banker founded in 1844 in Geneva and active in wealth management for private clients. It is the last French-speaking private banker in Switzerland, headed by three partners with unlimited responsibility on their own assets. The institution holds a banking license in Switzerland, Turks and Caicos Islands and Singapore and has branches in the United Kingdom, France and Uruguay.


History
The Bordier bank was founded in 1844 when Jaques Reverdin, who was previously employed at the Pictet bank, started the company to become a banker in Geneva. In 1871, Reverdin's son-in-law Ami Bordier joined the company as a business broker. Upon Reverdin's death in 1895 the management of the bank was given to Bordier and the institution was renamed Bordier & Cie.
Ami Bordier was joined by his two sons, Pierre and Édouard, in 1897 and 1904 respectively. In 1906, the institution relocated to number 16 rue de Hollande in Geneva, where its headquarters are located today. In 1917, Ami Bordier retired and his sons became the bank's managers. Guillaume and Jacques Bordier, Pierre's sons, became partners in 1936 and Raymond, Pierre's third son, and Edmond Bordier, Édouard's only son, joined in 1938. In 1966, Philippe Bordier, Jacques’ oldest son, and André Bordier, Guillaume's son, joined the bank as partners and in 1974 they were at the head of the bank.
In 1975 the bank used an IBM system to computerize and automate their banking system. The bank later adopter the Olympic software at the end of the 1980s, which allowed staff to manage clients’ accounts online.
In 1992, Pierre Poncet became a partner, the first time someone outside of the Bordier family occupied this position. Gaétan Bordier joined the bank in 1994, becoming the fifth generation to join the institution. Grégoire and Evrard, also from the fifth generation, joined as unlimited partners in 1997 and 2011, respectively. In 2012 Michel Juvet replaced Pierre Poncet as managing partner with unlimited liability. In 2020, Christian Skaanild is in turn appointed as a general partner, while Juvet leaves his management position to become a limited partner. 
In 2020, the Bordier bank changed its legal status to a partnership limited by shares. The institution maintained its status of “private banker”, the last in Romandie and thus the only French-speaking bank in Switzerland to maintain this particular structure with unlimited liability on the managing partners' private assets.


Operations
Bordier & Cie is headquartered in Geneva with branch offices in Nyon, Bern and Zurich. Outside of Switzerland it has branches in Paris, Brest, Rennes, London, Providenciales in the Turks and Caicos Islands, Montevideo in Uruguay and Singapore. It is a member of the Swiss Private Bankers Association.
Bordier & Cie operates as private bankers. Their services focus on wealth management including tax advice, financial planning, and family services, with approximately CHF 18.2 bn in assets under management as of 30 June 2024. Bordier & Cie has created in 2015 Bordier FinLab SA. Bordier FinLab purpose is investments in various asset classes.
Based on distinctive investment criteria, Bordier FinLab's approach is in particular geared towards using seeding and/or capital acceleration to invest in products undergoing development. Bordier FinLab SA works with a limited number of established financial partners (including banks, MFOs & IAMs). Lastly, Bordier FinLab provides technology intelligence on trends and developments affecting the banking industry (Fintech, Blockchain, etc.) and could be used as an incubator for the Bordier Group where appropriate.


Subsidiaries and partnerships
In 2001 Bordier & Cie acquired a 45% share of Berry Asset Management, a private management firm in the United Kingdom. It became a majority shareholder in 2007 when it increased its share to 90% of the company. In 2007 the company expanded in to Uruguay and in 2018 purchased Helvetia Advisors, a consultancy firm. The bank opened in Paris in 2006 under the Bordier & Cie (France) S.A. subsidiary and opened regional offices in Brest and Rennes in 2017.
Bordier & Cie opened a branch in Singapore in 2011. The bank partnered with Military Commercial Joint Stock Bank in Vietnam in 2018 and they created a joint venture in 2020.
In Switzerland, the bank opened a branch in Lausanne in 2025 [30]. This opportunity allowed the bank to expand its influence in the Lake Geneva region.


Leadership


Managing Partners with unlimited personal liability
Grégoire Bordier
Evrard Bordier
Christian Skaanild


Limited Partners
Michel Juvet
Patrice Lagnaux
Aloïs Sommer
Alessandro Caldana


References

Borovets (Bulgarian: Боровец) is a village in Kocherinovo Municipality, Kyustendil Province, south-western Bulgaria. As of 2013, it had 94 inhabitants. It is situated close to the right bank of the Struma River at 2 km to the north-west of the municipal centre Kocherinovo.


Citations

The Bosnia and Herzegovina women's national volleyball team represents Bosnia and Herzegovina in international women's volleyball competitions and friendly matches.


Tournament record


World Championship


European Championship


References


External links
Official Website
Bosnia and Herzegovina national team Volleybox
Volleyball Association of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The British Academy Television Award for Best Single Documentary is one of the major categories of the British Academy Television Awards (BAFTAs), the primary awards ceremony of the British television industry. According to the BAFTA website, the category is "for one-off documentaries only. Includes individual episodes of documentary strands."
The category has gone through some name changes since its inception:

It was first awarded as an individual recognition from 1964 to 1970.
From 1978 to 1983 it was presented as Best Documentary.
From 1984 to 2006 it was presented as Flaherty Documentary Award or Robert Flaherty Documentary  Award, also from 1984 to 1990, documentaries that used to compete for the BAFTA Award for Best Documentary competed in this category instead.
Since 2007 it has been presented as Best Single Documentary.


Winners and nominees


1960s


1970s
Best Factual Documentary

Best Documentary


1980s

Flaherty Documentary Award


1990s


2000s

Best Single Documentary


2010s


2020s

Note: The series that don't have recipients on the tables had Production team credited as recipients for the award or nomination.


References


External links
List of winners at the British Academy of Film and Television Arts

Brotherhood of American Yeomen (acronym, BAY; originally, Farmer's Mutual) was a coeducational North American secret fraternal benefit society organized in 1897. In 1932, the organization was changed to Yeomen Mutual Life Insurance Company, a mutual, legal reserve, level premium company later known as AmerUs.


History
Brotherhood of American Yeomen (BAY) was a coeducational North American secret fraternal benefit society.  J.E. and C.B. Paul established BAY as Farmer's Mutual on February 25, 1897, at Bancroft, Iowa. Its name was changed to the Brotherhood of American Yeomen before its articles of incorporation were filed. It had chapters across the United States and also had members in Canada. It furnished family protection; there was also a juvenile department (for children of age 1–16). Men and women were admitted on equal terms.
Within the years 1917 to 1923, the BAY had effected a complete reversal of its former inadequate rate policy and set itself towards complete solvency. To provide an immediate funeral benefit, the Brotherhood attached a funeral coupon check to each of its new Class C certificates. This was good for one-tenth of the face of the certificate and was payable to the beneficiary immediately upon the death of the member if desired. All that was necessary was to cut off the coupon, take it to any bank, or send it to the supreme office, and if properly endorsed, it could be cashed at once. It had 26,203 members in 1908, growing to 43,212 members in 1917.  
A report on the BAY's business of 1920 to State insurance departments demonstrated that the Brotherhood continued to be one of the big leaders of the American fraternal system. The figures indicated that it recovered from the war and influenza period. It enjoyed favorable mortality, and the management guided its course with special ability, pressing to the utmost for gains in members and insurance, and took advantage of opportunities to strengthen its financial position. In that year, the BAY was 24 years old, having been organized on February 25, 1897. Two-thirds of the active societies of the U.S. and Canada were older. A tabulation in Statistics Fraternal Societies showed that 140 going societies in 1920 were organized before the BAY, and 68 came into existence since. Yet the BAY stood fifth among all these societies in membership, having 285,948 benefit members on December 31, 1920. It stood sixth in the table of insurance in force, that item reaching US$367,882,000. The net increase of membership in 1920 was 12,122, and US$14,604,500.
In the preceding four years, the membership grew from a little over 200,000 to its new figure, which, with four months of 1921 to the credit of the field department, was about 300,000. So energetic was the field department of the BAY that it stood third among all societies for the production of new business. The average age of the members decreased by .23 of a year in 1920, starting at 38.81 on January 1 and ending at 38.58 on December 31st. The mortality per 1,000 members decreased from 8.24 in 1919 to 7.8 in 1920. The cost of management per member in 1920 was US$1.52. In 1919, it was US$1.53. In the same year, Editor Harry C. Evans of the Yeoman's official organ, The Yeoman Shield, suggested that the national conclave took action to simplify the titles of the officers. Instead of having a "Grand Foreman", he would have a president; instead of a "Grand Master" of ceremonies, a vice-president; "Chief Correspondent" would be changed to the secretary, and “Grand Master of Accounts" to the treasurer. He cited some of the titles in the fraternal world-Supreme Ruler, Supreme Regent, Supreme Ranger, Supreme Oracle, Supreme Mystic Ruler-and exclaimed, "That's the limit!" He wondered that some of the societies hadn't called their president the "Supreme Being", and added that other titles, if less ambitious, were as amusing.
In 1923, the 3,191 subordinate lodges had 208,782 benefit and 7,607 "social and auxiliary" members, while the juvenile department had 5,607 members. There were 100,000 BAY members in 1930. The headquarters were at Des Moines, Iowa.
In May 1932, the BAY became a mutual, legal reserve, level premium company called Yeomen Mutual Life Insurance Company. Yeomen Mutual Life Insurance Company changed its name to American Mutual Life Insurance Co. in 1938. American Mutual Life merged with Central Life Insurance in 1994, forming AmerUs Life. AmerUs was purchased by the British insurance company Aviva in 2006, for $2.9 billion.


Symbols and traditions
The name Yeoman was chosen for its historic use for those who owned lands; BAY was formed the help farmers.
The Supreme Conclave was its governing body. Its officers were the grand foreman, the grand master, the chief correspondent, and the grand master of accounts.  Its lodges or branches were called "Homesteads". Its supreme office (headquarters) was known as "Castle". Its members were called archers.
Its ritual included "signs, passwords, and obligations" and was based on Sir Walter Scott's Ivanhoe. BAY's publication was The Yeoman Shield.
Its pin was a black enameled circle, with a bow and arrow, at tension and pointing upward, with the word "Yeomen" below, all embossed in gold.


References

Buzluq (Buzlug, lit. 'iced'; Armenian: Բուզլուխ, romanized: Buzlukh) is a village and municipality in the Goranboy District of Azerbaijan. The municipality consists of the villages of Buzluq, Gülüstan, and Başqışlaq. The village had an Armenian majority prior to the First Nagorno-Karabakh War and Operation Ring.


History
During the Soviet period, the people of Buzluq were mainly engaged in agriculture with considerable achievements due to the heavy subsidization policy by the Azerbaijan SSR government.
With the outbreak of the conflict between Nagorno-Karabakh and Azerbaijan, the people of Buzluq were targeted by Azeri OMON units. The village was attacked from the nearby Azeri-populated villages of Shafag and Zeyva. In the summer of 1991 the village was occupied by Azeri OMON forces and was subsequently looted. Soviet troops stationed in Kirovabad took an active role in aiding Azeri forces in deporting the Armenian population from the area, which has come to be known as Operation Ring. In the fall of 1991, Armenian forces captured the village. Later it was occupied together with the whole Shahumyan district by Azerbaijani forces in June 1992.
Buzluq was one of 13 Armenian villages of the former Shahumyan region, which voted in the 1991 referendum to reunite with Nagorno-Karabakh and declare independence from the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic. It is now incorporated into the Goranboy District of the Republic of Azerbaijan.


References


External links
Buzluq at GEOnet Names Server

The International Association of  Film and Television Schools (French: Centre international de liaison des écoles de cinéma et de télévision, CILECT) is the association of the world's major film and television schools. 


History
CILECT was founded in Cannes in 1955 at the proposal of Rémy Tessonneau, general director of the Institut des hautes études cinématographiques (IDHEC), who gathered together for the first time higher education film school representatives from France, Italy, Poland, Spain, UK, USA, and USSR.


Functions
CILECT's goals are to provide a means for the exchange of ideas among member schools, and to help them understand the future of education for creative personnel in film, television, and related media. It is dedicated to the creation, development and maintenance of regional and international co-operation among its member schools, and to the encouragement of film and television training in the developing world.


Regional organisations
The Groupement Européen des Ecoles de Cinéma et de Télévision / European Grouping of Film and Television Schools (GEECT) is the organisation of CILECT's European members, including schools in Israel, Lebanon, and Georgia.
CILECT Ibero América (CIBA) is the organisation of Latin American film and Luso-Hispanic CILECT schools.
CILECT Asia-Pacific Association (CAPA) is the regional organisation of the CILECT member schools in the Asia-Pacific Region.
CILECT Africa Regional Association (CARA) is the regional organisation of the CILECT member schools in the African Region.
CILECT's North American Regional Association (CNA) is the regional organisation of the CILECT member schools in Canada and the USA.
CILECT East Africa Regional Association (CEARA) is the regional organisation of the CILECT member schools in the East African Region.


References


External links
Official website

Caergwrle (foaled 1965) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse. In a racing career lasting from July 1967 until June 1968, the filly ran six times and won three races. After winning once as a two-year-old she showed improved form in the spring of 1968 to win the Classic 1000 Guineas at Newmarket Racecourse. Caergwrle was beaten in her only subsequent race and was retired to stud, where she had limited success as a broodmare.


Background
Caergwrle was a chestnut filly bred at the Cliff Stud in Yorkshire by Gwen Murless, the wife of the leading British trainer Noel Murless. Her sire Crepello won the 1957 Epsom Derby before becoming a successful sire of winners. Caergwrle's dam, Caerphilly, was a sprinter who won three races and finished third in the 1962 edition of the five furlong King George Stakes. Apart from Caergwrle, Caerphilly also produced St Chad, a colt who won the Wills Mile in 1967. As descendants of the broodmare Malapert, Caerphilly and Caergwrle were closely related to the 2000 Guineas winner Pall Mall.
Caergwrle, who was named after a Welsh village, was trained by Noel Murless at his Warren Place stables at Newmarket, Suffolk.


Racing career
Caergwrle made her first racecourse appearance in the Star Stakes over five furlongs at Sandown Park in May. She ran promisingly to finish second to Fairy Path. In July Caergwrle started 2/5 favourite for the Findon Stakes at Goodwood Racecourse. She was regarded as a near certainty to win and was the subject of heavy betting on The Tote but lost her chance when she bolted before the race and galloped several furlongs at top speed before being caught. She eventually finished well beaten behind Fridoline. In September she recorded her first win when she won a five furlong maiden race at Chester.
On her three-year-old debut, Caergwrle showed vastly improved form when she won the seven furlong 1000 Guineas Trial Stakes at Kempton Park by four lengths. In the 1000 Guineas over Newmarket's Rowley Mile, Caergwrle was made 4/1 favourite in a field of fourteen fillies. Ridden by the nineteen-year-old Sandy Barclay, she won by a length from Photo Flash, with Sovereign a neck away in third.  A month later, Caerwrle was sent to Epsom for the Ebbisham Stakes over 8+1⁄2 furlongs. She was beaten a length by Ileana, who was carrying four pounds less. Caergwrle never ran again and was retired to stud.


Retirement
Caergwrle remained in the Murless family's ownership throughout her breeding career. She produced several winners, but none at a high level. Her most successful offspring, foaled when she was twenty-one years old, was St Ninian who won seven races, including the Jubilee Handicap at Kempton Park. The descendants of Caerwrle's daughter Cricceith had some success in New Zealand, the most notable being Batavian, who won the Great Northern Foal Stakes and the Hawke's Bay Guineas.
Stud Record:
1970 Corwen (GB): Bay gelding, by St. Paddy. Did not place in 10 starts.
1971 Caer-Gai (GB): Chestnut filly, by Royal Palace (GB) - Won one race and placed once from 5 starts in England 1974-5
1973 Caerinion (GB): Chestnut filly, foaled 20 February, by Royal Palace (GB) - placed second once from 4 starts in England 1975–6.
1974 Unnamed (GB): Bay colt, by Welsh Pageant. This colt never raced.
1975 Chop Gate (GB): Chestnut gelding, by Connaught. Won once in 14 starts.
1977 Claerwen (GB): Chestnut filly, by Habat. Was second in the 1979 Molecomb Stakes and died in 1993.
1981 Cwrle (GB): Chestnut filly, by Habat. Did not place in five starts.
1982 Cricceith (GB): Chestnut filly, by Brigadier Gerard (GB) - placed second once from 5 starts in England 1985–6.
1983 Cynwyd (GB): Bay filly, by Imperial Fling. Did not race.
1984 Abergwrle (GB): Grey filly, foaled 1 January, by Absalom (GB) - Unplaced in 2 starts in England 1986 and died in 2002.
1986 St Ninian (GB): Chestnut colt, foaled 27 May, by Ardross (IRE) - won 7 races and placed eleven times including the Newbury Spring Cup (Handicap); Jubilee Handicap, Kempton; 2nd LR Strensall Stakes, York and 3rd LR Ben Marshall Stakes, Newmarket from 40 starts in England 1988–93.


Assessment and honours
In their book, A Century of Champions, based on the Timeform rating system, John Randall and Tony Morris rated Caergwrle a "poor" winner of the 1000 Guineas.


Pedigree


References

Calcimitra meyeriana is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family Mitridae, the miters or miter snails.


Distribution
This marine species occurs off Natal, South Africa.


References


External links
Fedosov A., Puillandre N., Herrmann M., Kantor Yu., Oliverio M., Dgebuadze P., Modica M.V. & Bouchet P. (2018). The collapse of Mitra: molecular systematics and morphology of the Mitridae (Gastropoda: Neogastropoda). Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society. 183(2): 253-337

Calle-Calle Bridge is an arch bridge spanning Calle-Calle River, that separates downtown Valdivia from Las Animas, a residential area of the city. It allows connection from Valdivia to the airport of Pichoy and to the Pan American Highway.
It was inaugurated on 21 February 1945 after several years of construction.


References

Campo Limpo may refer to:

Subprefecture of Campo Limpo, São Paulo
Campo Limpo (district of São Paulo)
Campo Limpo (São Paulo Metro)
Campo Limpo Paulista, a municipality in the state of São Paulo
Campo Limpo de Goiás, a municipality in the state of Goiás


See also
Roman Catholic Diocese of Campo Limpo

Cape Peninsula University of Technology (Afrikaans: Kaapse Skiereiland Universiteit van Tegnologie), commonly referred to simply as CPUT, is a university of technology based in Cape Town, South Africa.
It is the only university of technology in the Western Cape province, and is also the largest university in the province by student population, with over 35,000 enrolled as of 2026. The institution was established in 2005, through the merging of the Cape Technikon, Peninsula Technikon, and a few other independent colleges.


History
CPUT was established on 1 January 2005, through the merging of the Cape Technikon and Peninsula Technikon, as well as numerous small colleges, following years of change in the higher education landscape of South Africa.
In 1993, the Technikons Act was promulgated, which allowed technikons to offer bachelor's degrees (B.Tech), master's and doctoral degrees in Technology.
In March 2001, then-Minister of Higher Education Kader Asmal announced the National Plan on Higher Education. In May 2002, he announced the possible merger of the two institutions, with the National Working Committee also recommending the University of the Western Cape be included in the merger.
Towards the end of 2002, the final merger was announced, and in October 2003, the institution's new name was approved. An Executive Interim Management body was appointed towards the end of 2004.
Prof. L Vuyisa Mazwi-Tanga was appointed as the first vice-chancellor of CPUT in February 2006. Around the same time, the nine faculties of the original institutions were merged and re-organized into six new ones. These were Applied Science; Business; Education and Social Sciences; Engineering; Health and Wellness Sciences; and Informatics & Design.
A separate postgraduate unit was established to offer multidisciplinary postgraduate programmes and funded research known as the e-Innovation Academy, and as from March 2008 the Faculty of Informatics & Design Research Unit.
The Department of Information Technology in collaboration with the Bridgetown Community, Athlone, COFISA and IDM launched the Athlone Living lab, a community ICT innovation project, in September 2008. This would be the first Living Lab in the Western Cape.

In April 2008, then-South African Minister of Finance Trevor Manuel was appointed Chancellor of CPUT.


Campuses

CPUT has five main campuses:

The Bellville Campus, formerly the campus of the Peninsula Technikon (33°55′56″S 18°38′25″E)
The District Six Campus, formerly the campus of the Cape Technikon (33°55′52″S 18°25′49″E)
The Mowbray Campus, formerly the Mowbray College of Education (33°56′47″S 18°28′18″E)
The Granger Bay Campus, housing the Cape Town Hotel School and the Survival Centre (33°53′58″S 18°24′41″E)
The Wellington Campus, formerly the Boland College of Education (33°38′12″S 19°0′36″E)


Cooperative education
The large majority of courses offered by CPUT incorporate in-service training, consisting of an internship of usually six months to a year.
The university's comprehensive co-operative education policy ensures the student is placed within a company approved by the university; this ensures that institutional academic learning is incorporated into work-based content.


Notable people
Zozibini Tunzi – actress, model and Miss Universe 2019
[Seth Rotherham – entrepreneur and media personality
Gillian Abel – public health researcher
Tariro Mnangagwa – film producer, actress and conservationist
Justin Bonello – television personality, producer, and writer.
Alvin Botes – African National Congress (ANC) politician
Trevor Manuel – retired politician and former anti-apartheid activist
Celeste Matthews Wannenburgh – actress, playwright


List of Chancellors
Below is a list of individuals who have served in the role of Chancellor of CPUT.

Prof. Brian Figaji (December 2025 - present)


See also
Education in South Africa
List of universities in South Africa
Open access in South Africa
List of South African open access repositories


References


External links
The Information Society Institute (an initiative of CPUT)

Castanéu is one of 54 parishes in Cangas del Narcea, a municipality within the province and autonomous community of Asturias, in northern Spain.


Villages
Augüera
Castanéu
Sierra de Castanéu
Táranu


Other populated places
Casa María la Fonte
La Chana
Las Frauguas


References

Chad Fleischer (born January 4, 1972, in Columbus, Nebraska) is an American former alpine skier who competed in the 1994 Winter Olympics and 1998 Winter Olympics. Fleischer is a 10-year veteran of the Men's US Alpine Ski Team, Two Time National DH skiing Champion, named to Five World Championship Teams and Three Olympics Teams (could not compete in 2002 Salt Lake Olympics due to dislocated right knee in Wengen SUI three weeks prior to the Games). His best performance came in 1999 at the World Cup Finals, where he won a Silver Medal behind Lasse Kjus of Norway. Fleischer now owns and operates a chain of ski rental and retail stores in Steamboat Springs, Colorado. His wife Renée is a former San Diego Charger cheerleader and Denver Bronco cheerleader. They were married May 2000 in Maui, Hawaii.


References

Chad Fleischer at Olympics at Sports-Reference.com (archived)

Chamaecytisus proliferus, synonym Cytisus proliferus, is a small spreading evergreen shrub or tree in the pea family Fabaceae endemic to the Canary Islands. One of its subspecies, Chamaecytisus proliferus subsp. palmensis, synonyms including Chamaecytisus palmensis and Cytisus palmensis, known as tagasaste  or tree lucerne, is a well known tropical forage crop. It is native to the dry volcanic slopes of the Canary Islands, but it is now grown in Australia, New Zealand and many other parts of the world.


Description
Tagasaste is an evergreen shrub that has rough yellow-grey bark and velvety hairy young growth. Its leaves are composed of three greyish-green equal-sized leaflets, which are slightly paler on the underside. Its scented, creamy-white flowers form in small clusters in the leaf axils. Its flat pea-like pods are green, ripening to black. The seeds are tiny (45,000/kg), shiny and black. Tagasaste is considered to be a promiscuous legume, compatible with cowpea and Tagasaste 1502 Rhizobium. It will nodulate with a wide range of rhizobia.
Tagasaste is suited to sandy, well-drained soils of pH range 4–7. On deep, freely drained soils its roots can extend down to at least 10 metres. Any physical or chemical barrier in the soil that restricts root growth will reduce the productivity and survival of tagasaste. Cultivars from arid sandy areas are very susceptible to root rot fungus on poorly drained soils, specifically Fusarium, Pythium and Rhizoctonia. It will tolerate winter temperatures as low as −9 °C, but cultivars exist that can handle winter temperatures down to minus 15 °C as in Orange, Eastern Australia. Tagasaste leaves will be burnt by frost and seedlings can be killed at temperatures below 0 °C. Growth of mature trees will slow at winter temperatures below 20 °C. Tagasaste can tolerate temperatures up to 50 °C, but above 36 °C leaves close up from stress. Tagasaste flowers during the early rainy season, typically June to October in Australia, New Zealand and East Africa.
Tagasaste has two types of roots. There are a few large 'sinker' roots that can extend down to at least 10 metres. These are used to extract moisture from that depth during the long dry summers. There are also many 'feeder' roots that are mostly confined to the top 11⁄2 metres. These can extend out at least 15 metres from the trunk. They extract mineral nutrients from the soil, and also water in winter. In summer the soil water can be taken up at depth by the sinker roots, drawn into the shallow feed roots and then pumped into the soil. This 'hydraulic lift' allows the tagasaste to keep extracting nutrients from the shallow soil which would otherwise be too dry. This hydraulic lift is also seen in the native banksia shrubs that grow naturally on these soils and have a similar root design.
When tagasaste is planted in rows that run north–south, it has been found that both the shoots and the roots grow twice as fast on the west side of the plant as on the east side.


Taxonomy
Chamaecytisus proliferus was first described by Carl Linnaeus the Younger in 1782 as Cytisus proliferus. It was transferred to the genus Chamaecytisus in 1831.


Subspecies
As of August 2025, Plants of the World Online accepted four subspecies:

Chamaecytisus proliferus subsp. angustifolius (Kuntze) G.Kunkel
Chamaecytisus proliferus subsp. meridionalis Acebes
Chamaecytisus proliferus subsp. palmensis (Christ) G.Kunkel
Chamaecytisus proliferus subsp. proliferus


Fodder crop
Tagasaste is a valued forage for ruminants because of its good palatability and high protein content. It can be grazed directly, or cut and fed fresh or dried.
As a fodder crop tagasaste delivers between 23 and 27% crude protein (14–30% in Western Australia) and 18–24% crude indigestible fibre. With proper application of fertiliser it can maintain these levels even when grown on poor soils.
Phosphorus is particularly important both for the growth of tagasaste and for the growth of the animals grazing on it. Higher levels of phosphorus are required for the maximum growth of the animals than for maximum plant growth. Fertiliser will also reduce the level of phenolic compounds (similar to tannins) that increase when the plants are moisture stressed. These phenolic compounds make the tagasaste less palatable and reduce the animals' feed intake. The phenolics suppress the utilisation of protein in the rumen, and as a result feed intake. Despite the crude protein always being above 14%, supplementing with a high-protein feed like lupin seed stimulates animal feed intake when phenolics are high in tagasaste. Tagasaste typically has the same nutritional value as the best type of alfalfa when planted on good soil balanced in nutrients. Daily weight gains of 1 to 1.5 kg per steer per day are achieved during the growing season, with 6–10 rotations per year, typically one every 6–8 weeks.
Flowering also changes the palatability of tagasaste. In Western Australia it will commence flowering in winter (~ June). The seeds are mature and shed in early summer (first warm day in December). In the summer following flowering the palatability changes in different parts of the plant. In tagasaste that has not flowered the leaves will be grazed and bark on the stems ignored. After flowering the leaf becomes less palatable and the bark more palatable. This results in stock stripping bark off the trunk. Also the growth rate of the plant slows and leaves will be shed. The grazing management is designed to prevent flowering and keep tagasaste in the vegetative juvenile state. Trials have shown that if tagasaste is heavily grazed an  or mechanically cut in the first six months of the year, it will not flower in the second half of the year. Occasionally when mechanically cutting, one limb on a plant can be missed. This limb will go on to flower, and show all the other problems, while the rest of the plant is maintained in a vegetative state.
Initially tagasaste was developed to replace hand feeding sheep during autumn in Western Australia, when feed supplies were normally very low. This involved locking the tagasaste up for 11 months and then grazing it with 100 sheep per hectare for a month. As the tagasaste grows to about 3 metres height in 11 months, it must be mechanically cut while the sheep are in the paddock. Sheep can not be set stocked on tagasaste as this can lead to plant deaths.
A breakthrough came with the discovery that cattle can be set stocked on tagasaste. Cattle tongues are too large to pick off the new shoot buds, and some leaves always remain on the plant. Sheep can remove every leaf from tagasaste but this does not cause plant deaths. The removal of new buds by sheep, which appear about six weeks after grazing, can lead to plant deaths. Today the majority of tagasaste is used for cattle grazing with plantations able to be grazed at any time of year. Though it can grow up to 5 metres in height, when managed for grazing it is kept to less than 2 metres in height.
On the poor white sands in Western Australia tagasaste has increased the animal carrying capacity from 1 to 2 dry sheep equivalents, with annual pastures to 8-10 dry sheep equivalents (~ 1 cow) per hectare with mature tagasaste. This is roughly a tenfold increase in soil fertility-based carrying capacity. The yield of edible dry matter (leaves and fine stems) in the West Midlands is mostly in the range of 3–5 tonnes per hectare. It also prevents the wind erosion and excessive ground water recharge that were major environmental problems before. Recently it has been found that tagasaste can sequester carbon at the rate of about 6 tonnes CO2 equivalent per hectare per year. About half the CO2 being stored is as organic carbon in the soil and half is in the wood of the branches, trunk and roots. Tagasaste typically yields roughly 1 ton of edible material per 100mm of rain per hectare per year.


Tagasaste by country


Australia
The potential of tagasaste as a Spanish fodder was identified by Dr Perez, a medical practitioner, based on La Palma island in the Canary Islands in the 1870s, and Spanish cattle farmers. He wrote to the Spanish authorities promoting tagasaste as a fodder shrub but could not get them interested. He then sent seed to Kew Gardens in England. Kew Gardens tested tagasaste and then sent seed to all its colonies around the world. In Australia, tagasaste's potential was promoted by a number of individuals over the next century (e.g. Dr Schomburge in South Australia and Dr Laurie Snook in Western Australia) but was not adopted on a large scale until the 1980s in Western Australia.
The first 2 ha of tagasaste in the West Midlands of Western Australia was planted by John Cook on his farm near Dandaragan in 1982. The success of this small paddock excited the interest of local farmers and researchers. Before this the farming systems in the region were totally based on annual pastures and crops. The region has strongly winter dominant rainfall, with up to eight months without rain over some summers. Until the development of tagasaste it was believed it was not possible to grow perennial pastures in this region.
In 1984 the Martindale Research Project was started by the University of Western Australia with a large grant from Sir James McCusker. This project encouraged the participation of local farmers and the Western Australia Department of Agriculture in research and development. Farmers such as John Cook and Bob Wilson at Lancelin developed seeding and mechanical cutting equipment that allowed tagasaste to be sown and managed cheaply by farmers on a broadacre scale. The Martindale Research Project resolved many issues relating to agronomy, animal production and economics that resulted in a reliable package that farmers could adopt with confidence. The Western Australia Department of Agriculture also conducted trials on their Badgingarra Research Station and at Bob Wilson's farm at Lancelin. Local farmers and researchers formed the West Midlands Fodder Shrub Improvement Group. This evolved into the Evergreen Group, which expanded its interests to include a range of other shrubs, grasses and perennial legumes.
There are now about 100,000 ha of tagasaste in Western Australia. In Western Australia it is mostly grown on deep, infertile sands in regions nearer the coast with 350 to 600 mm rainfall. Most of the tagasaste in Western Australia is in the West Midlands sand plain to the north of Perth.


New Zealand
The use of tagasaste as a fodder crop was identified as early as 1897 in the Taranaki Region. As of 2011 it is still recommended as a fodder crop in some parts of the country but it also is becoming an invasive species. The Department of Conservation, a government agency responsible for protecting public conservation land, considers tagasaste to be an "environmental weed".


Cultivars
In Australia a prostrate form of tagasaste has been developed by selection, called Weeping Tagasaste. It is hoped that this plant will not require mechanical cutting or pruning. It is too early to say whether Weeping Tagasaste will yield the same production levels as that of normal tagasaste. Initial indicators are that production is lower and that the plant may be more vulnerable to soil disease.
In South Africa three eco adapted genetic lines have been trademarked: "Green Kalahari" for arid areas (300–500 mm), "Cattle Candy" for temperate areas (600–800 mm) and "Kilimanjaro" cultivar for tropical highland areas (800–3500 mm) of rain. Commercial breeding of tree lucerne cultivars have led to improved varieties with increased hardiness, disease resistance and a wider range of growing conditions and applications. The use of tree lucerne for silvopasture agroforestry as a companion crop is one example of dual use of the same land for increased production. Sheep are then used to suppress weeds and keep the tree lucerne in check, preventing it from shadowing out the main forestry crop. The biological fertilisation is enhanced with green manure and trampling, improving the soil over time, and leading to production increases.


References


External links

http://biotechtreelucerne.com
https://web.archive.org/web/20140204074003/http://kimseed.com.au/Seeds/WEEPING%20TAGASASTE%20SEEDLINGS%20Brochure.pdf
http://whoswho.co.za/justice-malanot-815405

Champion Lakes Boat Club was formed in 2008 and is the only aquatic club in Western Australia to combine dragon boating, kayaking, rowing, and radio sailing. Located at Champion Lakes Regatta Centre, Henley Drive, Champion Lakes, Western Australia.
Champion Lakes is the only world class venue available in Western Australia and has made dragon boating, kayaking, rowing, and radio sailing more accessible to the Southern suburbs due to its close proximity to surrounding suburbs such as Armadale, Kelmscott, Westfield and Roleystone compared to other clubs. In addition to this, it has become the primary regatta centre for many kayaking, rowing, and dragon boating events, as well as state team selections.
The clubhouse comprises two sheds, one for rowing equipment, and the other for kayaking, dragon boating, and radio sailing, with practices being available for kayaking and rowing most mornings and radio sailing and dragon boating most evenings.
Due to its youth, the club has struggled to get representatives in the higher levels of their respective disciplines however, there have been several state and national team representatives, such as Suzie Edwards, Todd Clappinson, Vuthoeun Moeun, Daniel Foucar,  Russel Clappinson and John Bienke for the Dragon boating U16, U18, premier, Senior A and senior C national Auroras teams respectively, Sam Mctigue for the national kayaking team, and Jennifer Parker and Daniel Real for the rowing state masters team.


Champion Lakes Rowing Club
Champion Lakes Rowing Club was first established in 2009, and in 2013 won its first state title for the women's E grade double scull. In 2014, an improved training regime lead to the club following this up with a 2nd place in the Women's C grade single and double, a state title in the men's C grade pair and single, and two state titles for the women's E grade coxed four and women's D grade coxed quad scull.


References

The Charles-George Reclamation Trust Landfill is a hazardous waste site located in the town of Tyngsborough, Massachusetts, which is part of the Environmental Protection Agency's Superfund program.  It is now the site of a 2.6 MW solar farm.


Geography
The 19-acre (7.7 ha) site is located one mile (1.6 km) from the center of Tyngsborough near the Dunstable border. Additionally, the landfill is bordered by a 16-acre (6.5 ha) marsh and 61-acre (25 ha) pond to the east, dubbed Flint Pond Marsh and Flint Pond respectively as well as the Dunstable Brook to the west.


History
Originally a landfill serving local communities in the 1950s and 1960s, the landfill was expanded in 1967 to accept both household and industrial waste, and from 1973 to 1976 to accept hazardous waste. During the period of hazardous waste acceptance, the site accumulated a large quantity of volatile organic compounds and metal slugs. In 1981, the site was assessed to have the fourth largest amount of hazardous waste in the New England area out of 302 New England landfills assessed.  Upon further assessment it was found that over 1,000 pounds (450 kg) of mercury was disposed of and 2,500 cubic yards (1,900 m3) of chemical wastes were deposited in the landfill. It was found that the contaminants had leaked into the groundwater and contaminated nearby wells at the Cannongate Condominium. In 1983 contaminants had been found in the wells of households neighboring the condominium. Following the sites state-ordered closure in 1983 to 1998 the site was subjected to clean up by the Environmental Protection Agency which included the creation of a permanent water supply for residents, the migration of contaminants, and the capping of the landfill.  In 2017, construction was completed of a 2.6 MW solar farm consisting of 10,000 panels and constructed by the Citizens Energy Corporation.


Environmental damage
In addition to groundwater contamination, Flint Pond has also suffered contamination due to its proximity to the site. Several species of fish and eels were found to have increased levels of mercury and arsenic in their bodies.


Litigation
In 2003, the site's former owners, Dorothy George and Charles George, settled all claims against them for $3.8 million.  The trustees later paid the Massachusetts Division of Fish and Wildlife $1.2 million in 2004 and $625,000 in 2007 to establish conservation land in the towns of Tyngsborough and neighboring Dunstable.


References

Charles Johnston (17 February 1867 – 16 October 1931) was an Irish writer, journalist, theosophist, naturalist, and Sanskrit scholar. Johnston joined the Indian Civil Service in 1888 but left India after two years due to malaria and settled in the United States in 1896. He wrote numerous books on Indian philosophy, translating works from Sanskrit as well as on Theosophy.  He was married to the niece of Madame Blavatsky and was involved in the development of the Theosophical Society in the United States. 


Biography
He was born on 17 February 1867 in the small village of Ballykilbeg (in Downpatrick), County Down, Northern Ireland. His father, William Johnston (1829–1902), was an Irish politician, a member of parliament from South Belfast, and a member of the Orange Order. His maternal grandfather was Sir John Hay, 5th baronet of Haystoun. 
Charles Johnston studied at Derby, England and Dublin University becoming interested in Oriental Studies, and learned Sanskrit, Russian and German. Among his classmates were William Butler Yeats and George William Russell, with whom he shared an interest in the occult.

Later, Johnston worked as a journalist. In 1884, he read Alfred Percy Sinnett's work The Occult World and founded, together with Yeats and Russell on 16 June 1885, the Hermetic Society in Dublin. After 1885 he also joined the Theosophical Society, and co-founded in April/June 1886 the Theosophical Lodge in Dublin. He was responsible for introducing Yeats to Madame Blavatsky in spring 1887. On 14 October 1888 he married Vera Vladimirovna de Zhelihovsky (1864–1923), the niece of Helena Blavatsky. He also entered the Indian Civil Service the same year, and served for two years in the (British) Bengal Civil Service before contracting malaria. He was an assistant magistrate in Murshidabad for some time. He resigned and was treated in Austria. Johnston translated several works from Sanskrit and Russian. As an author, he devoted himself primarily to philosophical and theosophical topics. When the Theosophical Society split in 1895, he followed the direction of William Quan Judge and was a member of the Theosophical Society in America (TGinA). After Judge's death the following year, Katherine Tingley came to head the organization. Then in 1898, Johnston, who had initially supported Tingley, seceded from Tingley's organization along with some 200 other members led by Ernest Temple Hargrove to form the Theosophical Society in America (Hargrove) Branch. In the US, Johnston continued to write commentaries on matters relating to India. 
Johnston was president of the Irish Literary Society. 
Johnston was also a member of the Linnean Society of New York and was a keen observer of birds especially in the New York region. He influenced several young ornithologists including Ludlow Griscom (whose father was involved in the Theosophical movement) and Joseph Hickey, both of the Bronx County Bird Club.


Bibliography


Collected writings
Johnston, Charles, The Mukhya Upanishads: Books of Hidden Wisdom
Johnston, Charles, The Tao Teh King: Lao Tse's Book of the Way and of Righteousness
Johnston, Charles, The Vedanta Philosophy of Sankaracharya
Johnston, Charles (1908), The Bhagavad Gita: The Songs of the Master, ISBN 978-0-524-09711-3 {{citation}}: ISBN / Date incompatibility (help)
Johnston, Charles, Hidden Wisdom: The Collected Writings of Charles Johnston, Vol. I]
Johnston, Charles, Hidden Wisdom: The Collected Writings of Charles Johnston, Vol. II
Johnston, Charles, Hidden Wisdom: The Collected Writings of Charles Johnston, Vol. III
Johnston, Charles, Hidden Wisdom: The Collected Writings of Charles Johnston, Vol. IV


Theosophical and Indological writings
Useful Sanskrit Nouns and Verb in English Letters. London: Luzac, 1892.
The Awakening to the Self. Translation of Sankarâchârya. New York: Johnston, 1897.
From the Upanishads. Portland, ME: Thomas Mosher, 1899.
The Memory of Past Births. New York: Theosophical Society Publishing Co., 1899.
Karma: Works and Wisdom. New York : Metaphysical Pub. Co., 1900. Available at hathtrust.
The Song of Life. Flushing, NY: Charles Johnston, 1901. A translation of the "dialogue of Janaka and the sage", preceded by "a modern paraphrase of the Teachings".
The Bhagavad-gîta: "The Songs of the Master". Flushing, N.Y.: C. Johnston, 1908.
Parables of the Kingdom. Flushing, NY: Charles Johnston, 1909.
The system of the Vedânta according to Bâdarâyaṇa's Brahma-sûtras and Cankara's commentary thereon set forth as a compendium of the dogmatics of brahmanism from the standpoint of Çankara. Chicago, The Open Court Publishing Company, 1912.
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. New York: Quarterly Book Department, 1912.
Eastern and Western Psychology: a Theosophical Need. New York: Theosophical Society, 1917.
The Great Upanishads, Isha, Kena, Katha, Prashna, Upanishads Volume 1.  New York: Quarterly Book Department, 1927.
The Crest-Jewel of Wisdom by Śankarâchârya. San Diego: Theosophical University Press, 1946. Translated by Charles Johnston. Available at Theosophical University Press Online.


Popular books
Kela Bai: An Anglo-Indian Idyll. New York: Doubleday & McClure, 1900. Novel.
Ireland: Historic and Picturesque. Philadelphia: Henry T. Coates & Co., 1902. Illustrated travelogue.
Ireland's Story. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, 1905, 1923. Written with Carita Spencer. Illustrated history of Ireland.
Why the World Laughs. New York: Harper & Bros, 1912. A book of humorous stories from many countries.


References


External links
Works by Charles Johnston at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Charles Johnston at the Internet Archive
Works by Charles Johnston at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) 
Charles Johnston – Biographical Sketch by Universal Theosophy
The Writings of Charles Johnston compiled by Universal Theosophy
The Late Charles Johnston (letter to the New York Times editor)

Charles H. Kelly (February 25, 1862–January 5, 1940) was an American Major League Baseball third baseman.


External links
Career statistics from MLB · ESPN · Baseball Reference · Fangraphs · Baseball Reference (Minors) · Retrosheet · Baseball Almanac

"Cheerleader" is a song recorded by the American electronic music producer Porter Robinson for his third studio album, Smile! :D (2024). An electropop and synth-pop song, its lyrics, written by Robinson, deal with parasocial relationships. "Cheerleader" was released on March 20, 2024, through Mom + Pop, as the lead single from Smile! :D. For his first solo release in two years, Robinson wanted to create something that people would enjoy "with zero context". It was accompanied by a music video where Robinson enters a virtual reality.
Multiple critics highlighted the contrast between the song's melody and lyrics, further noting its influence from emo. The song peaked at number 12 on Billboard's Dance/Electronic Songs.


Background and composition
"Cheerleader" was Porter Robinson's first solo release in two years. It was one of the first songs that Robinson wrote for his new musical era. On writing the song, he said in a press release that he wanted to create something "that people could love with zero context – just instantaneous, universal, explosive connection". The lyrics depict the convoluted, parasocial relationship between musicians and their fans, one example being the line "She's got hearts in her eyes / Saying, 'Boy, you better watch the time / Cause if you're not mine I'd rather see you burned alive". The song features Robinson's own vocals, which Robin Murray of Clash described as "scintillating".
An electropop and synth-pop song, multiple critics noted the contrast between its melody and lyrics. Gillian Telling of People wrote that "Cheerleader" is "more of a pop anthem with emo undertones", contrasting with Robinson's previous works; Telling said Robinson was "reinventing his sound". Similarly, Cleber Facchi of Música Instantânea felt that the song shows Robinson having a "completely distinct approach" when compared to his previous releases due to its emo sound. Colin Joyce of Pitchfork said that the track resembled the emo pop of Metro Station and the post-hyperpop of Glaive and Aldn. Jason Lipshutz of Billboard described it as "a synth-pop shot of adrenaline, with buzzing melodies and instrumental pile-ups that will leave you dizzy", while Dan Harrison of Dork noted the song's "bouncy synths and earworm melodies". Robin Murray of Clash and Liberty Dunworth of NME described it as "explosive". Paul Simpson of AllMusic described the verses as resembling Phoenix's indie pop and the chorus as "soaring, anthemic [and] spiked with punchy breakbeats".


Release and reception
"Cheerleader" was released on March 20, 2024, through Mom + Pop, as the lead single from Robinson's third studio album, Smile! :D. The song was accompanied by a music video directed by Hugh Mulhern and creative-directed by Bradley & Pablo, where Robinson enters a virtual reality. Harrison described "Cheerleader" as a highlight from the album due to its blend of depth and accessibility. Lipshutz praised that Robinson had created "the complete opposite of background noise". Matthew Kim of The Line of Best Fit wrote that the song "has the most euphoric hook of the year". Narzra Ahmed from Clash described it as "anthemic". The song peaked at number 12 on Billboard's Dance/Electronic Songs.
"Cheerleader" has been featured in several video games, with inclusion in the soundtracks of EA Sports FC 25 (2024) and Forza Horizon 6 (2026). On May 1, 2025, "Cheerleader", alongside "Knock Yourself Out XD", was added to Dance Dance Revolution World. On June 8, 2026, a Hatsune Miku cover of the song arranged by Jamie Paige was added to Hatsune Miku: Colorful Stage!.


Year-end lists


Charts


References

Child labour in Bangladesh is significant, with 4.7 million children aged 5 to 14 in the work force in 2002-03. Out of the child labourers engaged in the work force, 83% are employed in rural areas and 17% are employed in urban areas. Child labour can be found in agriculture, poultry breeding, fish processing, the garment sector and the leather industry, as well as in shoe production. Children are involved in jute processing, the production of candles, soap and furniture. They work in the salt industry, the production of asbestos, bitumen, tiles and ship breaking.

New sources like the 2022 BBS National Children's Labour Survey suggest

About 1.78 million children are engaged in child labour. Of these, around 1.07 million are in hazardous work.
Total children working in that age is group is suspected to be about 3.54 million
More recent sources include
Establishment-based survey in 2023 by BBS 

states 38,006 children between the ages of 5 to 17 are engaged in hazardous works.
MICS 2025 (UNICEF + BBC)

9.2% of children aged 5 to 17 are engaged in child labour
This increase corresponds to about 1.2 million more children compared to 2019.

In 2006, Bangladesh passed a Labor Law setting the minimum legal age for employment as 14. Nevertheless, the enforcement of such labour laws is virtually impossible in Bangladesh because 93% of child labourers are employed in the informal sector such as small factories and workshops, on the street, in home-based businesses and domestic employment.
Despite the prevalence of child labour in Bangladesh, there has been an increase in legislation against child labour. Bangladesh has ratified, the ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention (C182). In addition, the country also ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.


Definitions
The definition of child labour varies depending on region, culture, organization, and government. The Western perspective portrays childhood as a carefree stage of life in which a person does not possess the capacity to be an adult. Various organizations have their own definition of child labour and its parameters.
The International Labour Organization's (ILO) Minimum Age Convention 138 states that at age 12 a child is allowed to light work in non-hazardous situations and at age 15 a child is allowed to enter the work force. The ILO defines child labour as "work that exceeds a minimum number of hours, depending on the age of a child and on the type of work". The ILO also has three categories pertaining to children in work: economically active children, child labour, and hazardous work. Children can be categorised as economically active if they are involved in work outside of school or the home at least one hour once every seven days. Children can be categorised as performing child labour if they are under the age of 12 or performing hazardous work. Children are categorised as performing hazardous work if they are involved in activities that may harm their physical, mental, or developmental health or safety.
The United Nations Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) defines child labour as any activity that affects a child's health and education. Its definition also states that child labour is work that leads to deprivation of childhood activities, exploitation and abuse.
The International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC) defines employment and economically active children as "paid and unpaid work in the formal and nonformal sectors of rural and urban areas". This definition excludes children working in their own households.
The Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics considers children aged 5–14 who work for one or more hours (per week) in both paid and unpaid settings to be child workers. For children older than 10, any economic activity is considered a form a child labour. This includes work both inside and outside of the household setting.


Causes and impact


Poverty

Poverty is widely recognised and acknowledged as the primary cause of child labour. The link between poverty and child labour is supported by efforts of international organizations, such as the ILO and the United Nations, to reduce child labour through poverty reduction policies. There is a strong negative correlation between the income level of a country and the incidence rate of child labour. An increase of $0–$500 per capita income to $500–$1000 per capita income can lead to a decrease in child labour incidence rate from 30%–60% to 10%–30%. Although the annual per capita income of Bangladesh has been increasing, around 9–13% of the total labour force in Bangladesh still consists of children aged 5–14. In a 2013 statistical report, UNICEF estimates that around 43.3% of the population in Bangladesh is currently living below the international poverty line.
Factors such as urbanization and population growth perpetuate poverty. In a 2013 statistical report, UNICEF estimated an annual population growth rate in Bangladesh to be 1.7% from 1990 to 2012. Populations move from rural to urban areas because there is an increase in available economic opportunities. A combination of poor living standards in urban settings and an influx of cheap labour from children perpetuate both poverty and the use of child labour. The prevalence of child labour can be attributed to the socioeconomic statuses of families living at or below the poverty line. Oftentimes, families rely on the extra income produced by their children in order to sustain their livelihood. Many children are forced to work to help support the family. In other cases, children are forced to work for a living for themselves because their families abandoned or could not take care of them. Studies have shown that children from poorer families are more likely to be in the work force due to their contribution to overall family income.


Demographics

The demographics of the population in Bangladesh can also be a predictor of child labour incidence rates. Children in rural areas are more likely to work than children in urban areas. This may be due to the agricultural history of Bangladesh and the tradition of children working alongside adults in the fields. However, in both rural and urban settings, boys are more likely to work than girls, with the majority of child workers falling in the age range of 12–14.
Family dynamics also contributed to child labour incidence rates. Children in households with a large proportion of adults in the family are less likely to work. Children in households where all adults are working are more likely to work. Children in households where there is a larger portion of paid adult workers are even more likely to work. These findings by Salmon (2005) indicate that children are most likely to labour in households that have little potential to generate income and are already earning as much as they can.


Lack of education

Lack of education remains one of the top impacts of child labour. Child labour is a deterrent to schooling. Many policies aimed at eradicating child labour have focused on increasing accessibility to education. Organizations such as the ILO, the United Nations, and UNICEF recognise the importance of education in helping to eradicate poverty and in preventing child labour growth rates. According to UNICEF, the new National Education Policy requires that children must complete school until grade eight and that school must be free. Many definitions of child labour state education as a right of childhood and consider barriers to education as a defining characteristic of child labour.
There is a strong relationship between child labour and school attendance. In a 2010 statistical report, UNICEF measured that around 50% of all working children in Bangladesh do not attend school. Another 6.8% of children between age 7 and 14 whom, while going to school, also work. Of those that do attend school, school performance is negatively affected when children are in the work force. Although school is free, many children are forced to drop out because they do not have the time or resources to attend. For many families, the income produced by their children is considered more valuable than an education that requires their child to stop working. A study conducted by Rahman (1997) found that around 58% of working children listed economic hardship as the reason they were not attending school. Of those that did choose to go to school, conditions of schools and the quality of education proved to be serious barriers to significant learning. A 2002 and 2003 survey conducted by the World Bank showed that on average teachers in Bangladesh miss one out of five days of work a week.
It has also been found that illiteracy rates are a predictor of child labour prevalence. In 2013, UNICEF estimates that total adult literacy is around 57.7%. Literacy rates also tend to be lower for females than males. In Bangladesh, less than 75% of girls finish their primary education.


Prevalence
According to the recent 2014 TVPRA List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor published by the U.S. Department of Labor's Bureau of International Labor Affairs, Bangladesh figures among the 74 countries where significant incidence of child labour and forced labour is still observed. 15 products are produced in such working conditions in Bangladesh.


Informal sector
Most child labourers in Bangladesh are employed in the informal sector. These forms of labour are hard to regulate and monitor. The most common forms of work is agriculture, in rural areas, and domestic service, in urban areas. The majority of all child labourers in Bangladesh work in agriculture. Agricultural activities include poultry farming, drying fish, salt mining, shrimp farming and produce logistics. Children in agriculture use dangerous tools, carry heavy loads, and apply harmful pesticides. Many of these children are employed by their families as extra hands in the fields or sent out to work for their own food. They often work long hours with little to no pay and endure dangerous conditions that result in many health issues.
Children, mostly girls, work as domestic servants in private households in Bangladesh. Domestic child labourers work long hours and subject to harassment, emotional, physical, and sexual abuse. The majority of children working as domestic workers are employed seven days a week and live in the home they serve. Separation from family and working in private homes often results in the abuse and exploitation of these children. They endure harsh working conditions that cause psychological stress, physical strain, and health issues with little pay or compensation in the form of food, clothing, and shelter. Because domestic service occurs in the home, it is often not considered economic work. Therefore, there are minimal regulations for fair working conditions and wages.
Other informal industries with large child labour activity (age below 18) include ship breaking and recycling operations, production of soap, matches, bricks, cigarettes, footwear, furniture, glass, jute, leather, textiles, restaurants, garbage picking and trash hunting, vending, begging, portering, and van pulling. Many working children earn less than 10 US dollars per month.


Formal sector

The garment industry is the largest employer of child labour in the formal sector. The industry expanded rapidly from 1983 to 1999, becoming the country's largest source of export earnings. Bangladesh is in the top ten largest garment exporters in the world. The garment industry not only increased economic earning but also increased available jobs in urban settings, especially for women. As a result, the incidence of child labourers in urban areas increased. The majority of labourers in the garment industry hired are girls and women. Bangladesh garment factories have been accused of forcing girls as young as 13 to work up to 11 hours a day to produce garments for western retailers.
Children in this industry work around 10 hours a day for about 12 U.S. dollars a month. Children are also exposed to various health and safety hazards. Garment shops are at great risk of fires due to blocked fire exits, poor crowd control, and lack of fire safety precautions. Working in garment shops also exposes children to dangerous chemicals and heavy machinery. These exposures to safety hazards can lead to various health issues ranging from cuts and bruises to musculoskeletal disorders.


Child labour laws influencing practices in Bangladesh


Legislation in Bangladesh
The Employment of Children Act 1938
This act allowed for children aged 15 or up to work in the railway industry and in transporting goods in port jobs. It also allowed for children aged 15–17 to work night shifts that may last until the morning under certain stipulations such as resting for 13 consecutive hours, working under someone that is 18 years or older, or serving an apprenticeship. It prohibited children under 12 from working in hazardous industries but did not mention protection for children between the ages 12–18.

The Factories Act 1965
This act prohibited children under 14 to work in or be present in factories. Factories was defined as any place with more than 10 people employed. It also listed various protections for children from hazardous machines and operations. It prohibited any work duration of longer than 5 hours between 7pm to 7am. It also states the weight lifting limits for types of workers (male, female, child).

Shops and Establishment Act 1965
This act defined a shop or establishment as a place that employs 5 or more people. This act prohibited children under the age of 12 from working in any establishment. It allowed children aged 12–18 to work in establishments but limited the number of work hours to a maximum of 7 hours a day.

The Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh
The Constitution of Bangladesh while guaranteeing the fundamental rights for the people prohibits all forms of forced labor under Article 34. Article 34 lays down that 'all forms of forced labor are prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offense punishable in accordance with law'.

The Children Act 2013
The Children Act 2013 repealed the previous Children Act 1974 which was inconsistent with international standards particularly with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989. Section 4 of this Act provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force every person shall be deemed to be a child who is below the age of 18 years. Though there is no specific provision prohibiting child labor it proscribes and punishes some serious offenses against children including exploitation of children (section 80).


Applicable laws from other legal jurisdictions
The Child Labor Deterrence Act 1993 (Harkin's Bill)

Originating from U.S. Senator Tom Harkin, this bill banned imports of items that were associated with child labour at various stages of production, whether it was direct involvement in the product or indirect involvement such as packaging. This law affected the labour situation in Bangladesh because garment industries, fearing a loss of business, fired many child labourers.

Human Trafficking Deterrence and Suppression Act 2012
According to the Office of Child Labor, Forced Labor, and Human Trafficking (OCFT) United States Department of Labor:In 2011, Bangladesh made a moderate advancement in efforts to eliminate the worst forms of child labor. Bangladesh passed the Human Trafficking Deterrence and Suppression Act 2012 which makes human trafficking (including labor trafficking) a capital offense, developed and fully funded a Child Labor Monitoring Information System to manage child labor related data and began implementation of a $9 million child labor project. However, legal protections regarding child labor are limited and the capacity to enforce child labor laws remains weak. Bangladesh maintains a low compulsory education age. Children in Bangladesh are engaged in the worst forms of child labor, primarily in dangerous activities in agriculture and domestic service.
The legislation tried to enroll more children and adults into school and away from work. This was not the outcome. Some children enrolled in school, but many sought other work. Due to the law, many kids took more dangerous jobs in the informal economy, including; prostitution, street hawkers, stone welding, and as maids. Schooling is compulsory only to age 10. The minimum age for most child labor is 14, 18 for hazardous work.


Initiatives against child labour

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 1995
Signed by the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), ILO, and UNICEF this initiative allowed children displaced and fired from the garment industry to receive education, vocational training, and skills training. It also provided families with income to make up for their child's lack of work. This program is also called "The Placement of Children Workers in School Programs and the Elimination of Child Labor." The MOU has made an impact in reducing child labour in the garment industry in Bangladesh. Because of this program, more than 8,200 children received non-formal education after losing their jobs. Additionally, 680 children received vocational training.

The Bangladesh Rehabilitation Assistance Committee (BRAC)
The Bangladesh Rehabilitation Assistance Committee is a non-profit organization founded in the mid-1970s in Bangladesh. BRAC, along with Grameen Bank, are the two largest lenders of microcredit in Bangladesh. Together they cover 59% of borrowers in the country. Microcredit has been shown to alleviate poverty but in small amounts. The effects of microcredit are not large enough to change the lives of an entire population. However, it has been shown to allow families in poverty to find a way out. BRAC has also been responsible for running schools for non-formal education that were put in place to teach children fired from jobs. These non-formal schools also gave children another option besides schooling. Along with the schooling program, families also received health care services and monthly cash stipends to make up for the wages their children were not bringing in by participating in the schooling program.

Other strategies
In addition to the work of the government, BRAC, and ILO, there have been a number of contributions from international organizations and donors to help start strategies against child labour. These strategies include: taking children out of hazardous work environments and placing them in schooling or training programs, giving families stipends to compensate for loss in wages from a decrease in child labour, and raising awareness of the harmful effects of child labour.


See also
Children's rights movement
Guaranteed minimum income
International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour, IPEC
IREWOC - Institute for Research on Working Children
Legal working age
Multinational corporation
Street children
Wage Slavery
Youth activism
Bangladesh textile industry
Steel industry in Bangladesh
Fishing in Bangladesh
Jute trade
International conventions and other instruments:

Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, 1999


Notes


Further reading
Timmerman, Kelsey (2009). Where am I wearing? A global tour to the countries, factories, and people that make our clothes. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ISBN 978-1-118-27755-3. - a quarter of the book is a personal account of the author's visit to Bangladesh

Chloé Cruchaudet (born 2 November 1976 in Lyon, France) is a French comic book illustrator, author and colorist.


Early life
Chloé Cruchaudet studied at the Émile-Cohl School in Lyon and then at the Gobelins School in Paris, where she studied animation.


Career
She committed to the field at the beginning of her career. She worked on series and animated films, notably Ernest and Celestine and Have you ever seen..., while developing personal projects.
In 2006, she entered the world of comics. She participated in the collective album Les Enfants Sauvés, released by Delcourt in November 2008. In 2009, she launched the Ida series, which details in three volumes the adventures of a thirty-year-old hypochondriac and authoritarian spinster who discovers a passion for travel. At the same time, she participated in the project Les Autres Gens brings together multiple artists around scriptwriter Thomas Cadène, who was the initiator of this comic book project.
In February 2016, Chloé refused her nomination in the Order of Arts and Letters, as did three other comic book authors.
In 2017 she began teaching at Émile Cohl school in Lyon.


Mauvais genre
In September 2013, she released Mauvais genre based on the essay "La Garçonne et l'Assassin" by Fabrice Virgili and Danièle Voldman. The book was well received by critics and earned awards:

Landerneau BD (2013)
Coup de cœur at Quai des Bulles festival
Critics' Award of the Association of Comic Book Critics and Journalists,
Cultura Audience Award at the Angoulême International Comics Festival (2014)


Recognition
René Goscinny prize (2008)


Bibliography
La Fête foraine de Gus, Balivernes éditions, 2006 ISBN 978-2-35067-002-7
Joséphine Baker, Nocturne, coll. « BD Chanson », 2006
Groenland Manhattan, Delcourt, 2008 ISBN 978-2-7560-0967-4
« Gargantua versus Alice », in Rendez-vous, Akileos, 2008
Participation in Enfants sauvés (dessin), avec Philippe Thirault (scénario), Delcourt, 2008
« Mon chat à moi 5 », in Mon chat à moi, Delcourt, 2008
Ida, Delcourt :
Grandeur et Humiliation, 2009 ISBN 978-2-7560-1539-2
Candeur et Abomination, 2011 ISBN 978-2-7560-2200-0
Stupeur et Révélation, 2013 ISBN 978-2-7560-2810-1
Participation in Autres Gens, volumes 2 and 3 (drawing), with Thomas Cadène (scenario), Dupuis, 2011
Mauvais Genre, Delcourt, 2013 ISBN 978-2-7560-3971-8
La Poudre d'escampette, Delcourt, 2015
L'Herbier sauvage, Soleil Productions, 2016
La Belle et la Bête, Gallimard jeunesse, 2018
La croisade des innocents, Soleil, coll. Noctambule, 2018 ISBN 9782302071278
Les belles personnes, Soleil, coll. Noctambule, 2020 ISBN 9782302081765
Céleste : « Bien sûr, monsieur Proust. » - Première partie, Éditions Soleil, 2022


References

Chris Pavlovski is a Canadian technology entrepreneur, best known as the founder and chief executive officer of the video platform Rumble.


Early life
He grew up in the Greater Toronto Area and began building websites as a teenager. Pavlovski attended the University of Toronto Mississauga between 2001 and 2006 and briefly worked as a network administrator at Microsoft before launching his own companies.


Career as entrepreneur
In 2001, Pavlovski founded Jolted (later Jolt) Media Group in Toronto, serving as its chief executive. While leading Jolt Media Group, he was appointed in 2010 as Director of Marketing for Next Giant Leap, a private space exploration company competing for the Google Lunar X Prize. In 2011, he co-founded Cosmic Development, an IT and software services firm which grew to over 150 employees. Pavlovski was a regional finalist for the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award in 2010. Between 2009 and 2012 Pavlovski served as director of marketing for NASA's Next Giant Leap.
In October 2013, Pavlovski launched Rumble, a Toronto-based video hosting and cloud platform, as an alternative (alt-tech) to YouTube with lighter content moderation policies.  Under his leadership, Rumble's monthly visitors rose from 1.6 million in 2021 to 31.9 million in 2022. In 2021 Rumble secured new investment from Peter Thiel and J.D. Vance. Later that year, Pavlovski announced a merger with the special-purpose acquisition company CF Acquisition Corp VI; the combined company began trading on Nasdaq (ticker RUM) in 2022 with an implied enterprise value of about $2.1 billion. Pavlovski also partnered with Trump Media & Technology Group for hosting Truth Social on Rumble's cloud platform.
Pavlovski became a billionaire in January 2025 after Rumble's stock increased in price by nearly 190 percent in 2024.


Private life
Pavlovski is Canadian by birth and of Macedonian descent. He serves on the board of Macedonia 2025, a non-profit organization focused on economic and educational development in North Macedonia.
He is a critic of internet censorship. In 2024, Pavlovski criticized the arrest of Telegram founder Pavel Durov in France as a "red line."


References

Christo Popov (born 8 March 2002) is a French badminton player who affiliates with Fos club. He won the men's doubles gold at the 2025 European Championships with his brother Toma Junior Popov. He also won a silver in the men's singles and a bronze in the men's doubles at the 2023 European Games. He became the first Frenchman to reach the semi-finals of the All England Open.
Christo Popov was the boys' doubles European U15 and U17 Junior Champions, also won the boys' singles silver medals at the 2018 European and 2019 World Junior Championships. He reached a career high as boys' singles World Junior number 1 in January 2020. He then clinched the boys' singles title at the 2020 European Junior Championships.


Early life
Christo Popov was born in Sofia, Bulgaria. He comes from a family featuring other professional badminton players. His father, Thomas, played for and coached the Bulgarian national team; his mother, Tzvetomira, was a national badminton referee; and his older brother, Toma Junior Popov, was a 2017 European Junior Champion.


Career
Christo Popov started playing badminton at the age of 5. He won the European U15 and U17 Junior Champions in the boys' doubles event with Kenji Lovang in 2016 and 2017 respectively, also finished as boys' singles U15 runner-up in 2016. He later won the boys' singles silver medals at the 2018 European and 2019 World Junior Championships. He managed to win the 2017 Italian Junior International, Danish Junior Cup, also 2018 and 2019 Hungarian Junior International.
At the age of 16, he already won the senior international tournament at the 2018 Bulgarian Open in the men's doubles event with his brother Toma Junior Popov. Christo Popov topped the boys' singles World Junior Ranking on 7 January 2020. He won the men's singles in the 2020 French national championships and in doing so became the youngest ever winner of the competition At the 2020 European Men's and Women's Team Badminton Championships he won the bronze medal with the French national team. In March 2020, he claimed his first BWF Junior International Grand Prix title by winning the Dutch Junior tournament. At the 2020 European Junior Championships in Lahti, Finland, Popov claimed three medals, winning a gold in the boys' singles, a silver in the team, and a bronze in the mixed doubles events.
In 2021, Popov opened the season by participating at the European Mixed Team Championships together with the French national team. The team finished as the finalist and won the silver medal. In May, he received the BEC Young Player of the Year and European Fan Player of the Yeat by the Badminton Europe. At the 2021 Spain Masters, he finished as a men's doubles semi-finalist, losing to the eventual winner, Indonesia's Pramudya Kusumawardana and Yeremia Rambitan.
In 2024, Christo won two BWF World Tour Super 300 titles, both achieved in Germany which are the German Open and the Hylo open. In the German Open, he defeated Danish Rasmus Gemke in two straight games to clinched his first ever World Tour title. Later in November, he defeated his own older brother Toma Junior Popov in the Hylo Open finals. The Popov brothers also competed for France at the 2024 Summer Olympics in the men's doubles event.
In 2025, Christo Popov reached a monumental milestone in his career by becoming the first French player to win the men's singles title at the BWF World Tour Finals in Hangzhou, China. Throughout the season, the 23-year-old showcased remarkable consistency, securing runner-up finishes at the Swiss Open and the French Open before his victory in December, where he defeated world No. 1 Shi Yuqi in straight games. Together with Toma, he also finished runner-up in the German Open. Additionally, he excelled on the continental stage by winning the gold medal in the men's doubles alongside his brother, Toma Junior Popov, and a bronze medal in the men's singles at the European Championships. These achievements propelled him to a career-high world ranking of No. 7 in the men's singles by late 2025, officially establishing him as France's top-ranked player.
In 2026, he began the season with a quarter-final berth at the India Open where he lost the match against Jonatan Christie. In February, Christo became a part of the first France team to win the European Men's Team Badminton Championship by defeating Denmark three games to two in the final. Christo also secured his first title of the year in March by defeating his brother, Toma at the German Open final. In April, Christo Popov won his first European Championships in men's singles when he defeated Anders Antonsen in the final in straight games. In the men's doubles, both him and his brother lost the final against the English pair, Ben Lane and Sean Vendy. Popov also made history with the French team, which reached the final of the Thomas Cup for the first time, and won the silver medal after being defeated by China. In July, Popov sealed a Japan Open title, beating the home favourite Koki Watanabe in straight games. He competed at the 2026 BWF World Championships in New Delhi, but was eliminated in the early rounds both in the singles and doubles. He reached a career high of World number 2 in the BWF world rankings released on 25 August 2026.


Achievements


European Games
Men's singles

Men's doubles


European Championships
Men's singles

Men's doubles


BWF World Junior Championships
Boys' singles


European Junior Championships
Boys' singles

Mixed doubles


BWF World Tour (5 titles, 3 runners-up)
The BWF World Tour, which was announced on 19 March 2017 and implemented in 2018, is a series of elite badminton tournaments sanctioned by the Badminton World Federation (BWF). The BWF World Tour is divided into levels of World Tour Finals, Super 1000, Super 750, Super 500, Super 300 (part of the HSBC World Tour), and the BWF Tour Super 100.
Men's singles

Men's doubles


BWF International Challenge/Series (4 titles, 2 runners-up)
Men's singles

Men's doubles

  BWF International Challenge tournament
  BWF International Series tournament
  BWF Future Series tournament


BWF Junior International (5 titles, 4 runners-up)
Boys' singles

  BWF Junior International Grand Prix tournament
  BWF Junior International Challenge tournament
  BWF Junior International Series tournament
  BWF Junior Future Series tournament


References


External links

Christo Popov at BWFBadminton.com
Christo Popov at BWF.TournamentSoftware.com (archived)
Christo Popov at Équipe de France (in French)
Christo Popov at InterSportStats
Christo Popov on Instagram

Ciaran Gaffney (born 6 May 1995) is a former rugby union player from Ireland. He played as a fullback or on the wing, and also played at centre in his youth career. Gaffney last played for Italian side Zebre in the Pro14, having come through the academy of Irish side Connacht.
Born in Dublin, Gaffney was educated in the Bish in Galway and the Cistercian College in Roscrea and also studied at NUI Galway. He represented Ireland in under-age rugby, playing up to under-20 level. A serious back and neck injury sustained while playing for Zebre against his old side Connacht at the Galway Sportsgrounds ended his playing career at the age of 23.


Early life
Gaffney was born in Dublin, and grew up in Galway. He went to school in the St Joseph's Patrician College (commonly called "the Bish") in the city for his Junior Certificate, and moved to the Cistercian College in Roscrea for his fifth and sixth year. Gaffney returned to his home city for his third level education, studying commerce and French at NUI Galway.
Gaffney began playing rugby at the age of four, when he joined Galwegians. He was a frequent attendee of Connacht games, serving as a ball boy until the age of 13. Gaffney played rugby in school, playing for the Bish in the Connacht Junior Schools Cup and Cistercian College in the Leinster Senior Schools Cup. In addition to rugby, Gaffney played Gaelic football growing up. He played for Salthill-Knocknacarra and Galway up to minor level.


Club career


Connacht
Gaffney played for Connacht at youth level from under-14 grade up. He was signed to the Connacht academy ahead of the 2014–15 season. He played for the province's second tier side, the Connacht Eagles, in his first two seasons. Gaffney made his debut for the senior team in November 2016, while still part of the academy, when he came on as a replacement in a Pro12 game against Irish rivals Ulster. He made his second appearance in January 2017. At the end of the season however, Gaffney did not sign a senior contract. Instead, on the advice of Connacht academy head Nigel Carolan, he headed to New Zealand.


Zingari-Richmond
After arriving in New Zealand, Gaffney began playing for amateur side Zingari-Richmond in the Dunedin Premier. He was invited to Dunedin by Otago head coach Cory Brown, a former elite player development officer for Connacht. The move was made with a view to Gaffney potentially playing for the provincial team and during his time in the country he was part of Otago's wider training squad.


Zebre
In August 2017, Gaffney signed for Italian Pro14 side Zebre. The team's head coach Michael Bradley had previously been head coach of Connacht. Gaffney made his debut for the team on 2 September 2017 against the Ospreys. He made his European debut on 13 October 2017 in a Challenge Cup game against Agen. His first try for Zebre came in a Challenge Cup game against Gloucester.
In February 2018, Gaffney was injured seriously playing against his former team, Connacht. He suffered a ruptured disk and dislocated his neck and was rushed to hospital where he was kept immobile for three days before surgery could be performed. Gaffney was ultimately forced to retire from rugby as a result of the injury, having played 18 games for Zebre.


International career
Gaffney represented Ireland internationally at under-age level. He made one appearance for the Irish schools team in 2013 on the back of his performances for Cistercian College. Gaffney played for the under-20 team in 2014 and 2015. He did not play in the 2014 Under-20 Six Nations but was named in the squad by Mike Ruddock for the 2014 Junior World Cup. Gaffney made his debut for the under-20 side against France in the pool stages. He started and played the full 80 minutes of all Ireland's games as they finished fourth in the tournament. In the 2015 Under-20 Six Nations, Gaffney made his tournament debut and played in two of the side's five games, as Ireland finished fifth. In April 2015, Nigel Carolan named him in the squad for the upcoming Junior World Cup. Gaffney played in three of the team's five games in the tournament as Ireland finished seventh.


References

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Clarinet Concerto in A major, K. 622, was completed in October 1791 for the clarinettist Anton Stadler. It consists of three movements, in a fast–slow–fast succession.

The work was completed a few weeks before the composer's death. It was to be his second to last completed work, Laut verkünde unsre Freude (K. 623) being his last, and has been described as his swan song. The date of its first performance is not certain, but may have been 16 October 1791 in Prague.
The concerto was written to be played on the basset clarinet, which can play lower notes than an ordinary clarinet, but after the death of Mozart it was published with changes to the solo part to allow performance on conventional instruments. The manuscript score is lost, but from the latter part of the 20th century onwards many performances of the work have been given on basset clarinets in conjectural reconstructions of Mozart's original.


History

Anton Stadler, a close friend of Mozart, was a virtuoso clarinettist and co-inventor of the basset clarinet, an instrument with an extended range of lower notes. It went down to low (written) C, instead of stopping at (written) E as standard clarinets do. Stadler was also an expert player of the basset horn. Mozart first composed music for that instrument as early as 1783, and for the basset clarinet in 1787. The latter features in the instrumentation of Così fan tutte (1789). In early October 1791 Mozart wrote to his wife from Prague that he had completed "Stadler's rondo" – the third movement of the Clarinet Concerto. The concerto was the final major work Mozart completed; Wolfgang Hildesheimer has described it as the composer's "last instrumental work, and his last great completed work of any kind", and the critic Henri Ghéon called it Mozart's "swan-song".
There is no surviving autograph for the concerto, and the printed score was published posthumously. The only relic of the work written in Mozart's hand is an excerpt of an earlier rendition written for basset horn in G (K. 584b/621b). This excerpt, dating from late 1789, is nearly identical to the corresponding section in the published version for A clarinet, although only the melody lines are completely filled out. After rethinking the work as a basset clarinet concerto, Mozart gave the completed manuscript to Stadler in October 1791. The date of the first performance is not known for certain, but was probably on 16 October 1791 in Prague. Stadler gave a concert there on that day, but no programme survives.

Several notes throughout the piece go beyond the conventional range of the A clarinet, but the basset clarinet was a rare, custom-made instrument, and when the piece was published after Mozart's death, a new version was made by unknown arrangers, with the low notes transposed to regular range. Objections were raised to this: a reviewer in the Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung commented that although the transpositions made the work playable on standard clarinets, it would have been better to publish Mozart's original version, with the alterations printed in smaller notes as optional alternatives.
The clarinettist Alan Hacker commented in 1969 that if the original manuscript had been published, "manufacturers would have made and sold basset clarinets by the thousand", but the manuscript was lost. Mozart's widow told a publisher that Stadler had either lost it, pawned it or had it stolen from him. In 1801 three different publishing houses – André, Sieber, and Breitkopf & Härtel – published editions of the work, all with the solo part adapted for the standard clarinet. These became the standard performing editions.
The basset clarinet fell out of use after Stadler's death and no original instruments from his time have survived. The instrument was revived in the latter part of the 20th century, when instrument builders attempted to replicate the original instrument, Indeed, basset clarinets have been built for the specific purpose of performing Mozart's concerto and clarinet quintet. Some of these have been based on 1790s engravings showing Stadler's instrument. On 28 June 1951, in Prague, the Czech clariettist Josef Janouš played the first modern performance of a version of the concerto reconstructed by the Czech composer Jiří Kratochvil (1924–2014), using a Selmer A clarinet with a basset lower joint, in which the four basset keys were operated with the right thumb as on the historical instruments. In 1968, the Swiss clarinettist Hans Rudolf Stalder used an instrument built by F. Arthur Uebel to perform a version of the concerto reconstructed in collaboration with Ernst Hess in Augsburg, Germany. He made the first recording of the concerto using a basset clarinet, with the Cologne Chamber Orchestra, in September 1968, Since 1984, Sabine Meyer has used a basset clarinet in A made by Herbert Wurlitzer to play the concerto (and also Mozart's clarinet quintet). 
The first reconstruction of the concerto for basset clarinet was made in 1951 by Kratochvil. This was followed by reconstructions by others, including Hess (1968), Hans Deinzer (1970) and Alan Hacker (1974). The most frequently performed are the two versions published by Bärenreiter (Kratochvil/Hess) and Schott (Wehle/Meyer) In 2023, the clarinettist Richard Haynes undertook to rewrite the score in G major using the fragment K. 621b. Since April 2024, Haynes has been performing the concerto in this version on a basset horn in G made for him by Jochen Seggelke.
Of all the clarinet concertos, the Mozart concerto is by far the most frequently performed.


Music
The modern scoring of the work is for solo clarinet in A, two flutes, two bassoons, two horns and strings. The typical performance time is 29 minutes (see "Audio files" below).


I. Allegro
The concerto opens with a sonata-form movement in A major. The form of the movement is as follows:

Orchestral ritornello: bars 1–56
Solo exposition: bars 57–154
Ritornello: bars 154–171
Development: bars 172–227
Ritornello: bars 227–250
Recapitulation: bars 251–343
Ritornello: bars 343–359
The first theme begins an orchestral ritornello that is joyful and light:

It soon transforms into a flurry of sixteenth notes in descending sequence, played by the violins and flutes while the lower instruments drive the piece forward. After the medial caesura, the strings begin a series of canons before the first closing theme, featuring first and second violins, enters. The second closing theme is much more subtle until the fanfare of its final two bars. As the soloist enters in bar 57, the clarinet repeats the opening theme with the expected added ornamentation. As the orchestra restates the main theme, the clarinet traverses the whole range of the instrument with several flourishes.
The secondary theme begins in the parallel minor, and eventually tonicizes C major before arriving in the dominant key, E major. At the end of the E-major section, there is a short pause, where the soloist conventionally improvises a short eingang (cadenza), although no context is offered for a true cadenza. The canonic material of the opening ritornello returns, this time involving the clarinet and leads to the novel feature of the soloist accompanying the orchestra with an Alberti bass over the first closing theme. The orchestral ritornello returns, ending with the second closing theme.
The development section explores a few new key areas including F♯ minor and D major, and even has some hints of the Baroque. Before the formal orchestral ritornello leading into the recapitulation, Mozart writes a series of descending sequences with the cellos and bassoons holding suspensions over staccato strings.
As is conventional in Classical concerto form, in the recapitulation the soloist and orchestra are united, and the secondary theme is altered to stay in the tonic. As the secondary theme comes to a close, the clarinet has another chance to improvise briefly, and this time leads the canonic material that follows. The Alberti bass and arpeggios over diminished chords for the soloist recur before the movement ends in a cheerful final orchestral ritornello.
At around 12 minutes, the Allegro is the longest movement in the concerto. 


II. Adagio
The second movement, which is in rounded binary form (i.e. ABA'), is in the subdominant D major. The two-part, cantabile 16-bar main theme is first performed by the solo clarinet and repeated by the orchestra:

The B section, in which the solo part is always prominent, exploits the chalumeau (lowest) register, including (in the reconstructed version) the basset tones down to (written) C3 (sounding A2), the lowest tone which the basset clarinet in A can play, and also uses the clarion register (the middle register). This section is followed in bar 59 by the aforementioned cadenza, which in turn is followed by the first theme, played piano (sometimes pianissimo) by the clarinet, which concludes the movement with a coda.


III. Rondo: Allegro
The concerto ends with a movement in A major. This movement is a blend of sonata and rondo forms that Mozart developed in his piano concertos, most notably the A major Piano Concerto, K. 488. It is in A–B–A–C–A–B–A form, with the middle A's being shorter restatements of the theme, unlike regular rondo form which is ABACA.
The movement opens with a cheerful theme:

This refrain is interspersed with episodes either echoing this mood or recalling the darker colours of the first movement:

The first A (bars 1–56) features the soloist in dialogue with the orchestra, often one phrase eliding seamlessly into the next. In some ways the orchestra and soloist are competing with one another – the more definitive the statement made by the orchestra, the more virtuosic the response by the clarinet.
The first B (bars 57–113) begins with a lyrical theme, and eventually features chromaticism and some very dramatic lines which feature the extended range of the basset clarinet.
The second A (114–137) is heard again briefly, before the orchestra moves right into the closing theme of the original A section, this time employing a descending sequence and hemiola, modulating to the relative minor.
The C section (bars 137–177), according to the musicologist Colin Lawson, contains "one of the most dramatic showcases for the basset clarinet in the entire concerto, featuring spectacular leaps, together with dialogue between soprano and baritone registers". Starting in F♯ minor, this section eventually modulates back to A major.
Bars 178–187 serve as the third A. By no means a full statement of the refrain, in this section Mozart sets the motif from the A section as a sequence of descending thirds leading to a stop on the dominant chord.
The second B (bars 188–246) begins like the first but is extended and explores some different key areas. This allows the soloist frequent opportunities to display chromatic figurations, and the composer to demonstrate his creativity in the reworking of the material.
The refrain (bars 247–301) is heard for the final time, finally in its entirety, before proceeding to the coda (bars 301–353). Here the rondo theme is developed dramatically, using the full range of the clarinet. The coda builds until a brief pause allows the solo clarinet to lead the orchestra into one more extended statement of the A theme, followed by the orchestra's now familiar closing theme of A.


Recordings
The first recording of the concerto, made in 1929 (Brunswick Records 20076‑8), featured Haydn Draper as soloist, conducted by Clarence Raybould. It was followed by recordings with Luigi Amodio and François Étienne as soloists. None of these three versions were thought to have survived but copies of Draper's version have been found in Australian pressings. The first recordings of the reconstructed counterpart were made in September 1968 with the Swiss clarinettist Hans-Rudolph Stalder and the Cologne Chamber Orchestra, conducted by Helmut Müller-Brühl. For this and for concert performances, Stalder had a modern Boehm basset clarinet built at the F. Arthur Uebel factory in Markneukirchen, Saxony.
The first recording using a reconstruction of a period basset clarinet was in 1973 on the EMI label with Hans Deinzer and the conductorless Collegium Aureum. Parts of the concerto are heard in the score of The King's Speech (2010; orchestral sections only), and the Adagio is heard in Out of Africa (1985), with the soloist Jack Brymer.
Other recordings of the concerto include:

Recordings made on period instruments include:


Notes


References


Sources


Books
Hildesheimer, Wolfgang (1983). Mozart. London: Dent. ISBN 978-0-460-04347-2.
Lawson, Colin (1996). Mozart: Clarinet Concerto. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47929-5.
Rosen, Charles (1997). The Classical Style: Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-04020-8.
Shackleton, Nicholas (2001). "Basset clarinet". Grove Music Online (8th ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/gmo/9781561592630.article.40001. ISBN 978-1-56159-263-0. (subscription, Wikilibrary access, or UK public library membership required) (subscription required)


Journals
Adelson, Rob (Fall 1997). "Reading between the (Ledger) Lines: Performing Mozart's Music for the Basset Clarinet". Performance Practice Review. 10 (2): 152–191. doi:10.5642/perfpr.199710.02.03.
Hacker, Alan (April 1969). "Mozart and the Basset Clarinet". The Musical Times. 110 (1514): 359–362. doi:10.2307/951470. JSTOR 951470. (subscription required)
König, Gisbert (2023). "Eine Reise durch die deutsche Klarinettenbaulandschaft" [A journey through the German clarinet-making landscape]. Rohrblatt (in German). Vol. 38, no. 3. pp. 107–117.
McCarthy, James (February 2012). "The best recordings of Mozart's Clarinet Concerto". Gramophone.
Poulin, Pamela L. (Fall 1982). "The Basset Clarinet of Anton Stadler". College Music Symposium. 22 (2): 67–82. JSTOR 40375184. (subscription required)
Ward, Martha Kingdon (April 1947). "Mozart and the Clarinet". Music & Letters. 28 (2): 126–153. doi:10.1093/ml/XXVIII.2.126. JSTOR 855526. (subscription required)


External links

Konzert in A für Klarinette und Orchester, KV 622: Score and critical report (in German) in the Neue Mozart-Ausgabe
Clarinet Concerto (Mozart): Scores at the International Music Score Library Project
"Work details, sound file", Köchel Verzeichnis, International Mozarteum Foundation
"An early review of the Mozart Concerto" (PDF) (in German and English). Translated by William McColl. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2023. Reprint and translation of Anon. (March 1802). "Recension". Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung (in German). 4. cols. 408–414. Originally published in William McColl (1982). "An early review of the Mozart Concerto". The Clarinet. 9 (2). and in the appendix of Lawson (1996).
Clarinet Concerto KV 622, reconstruction for basset clarinet A new edition based on the three early prints, critical report and commentary.

Classics Volume One, also stylised as Classics, Vol. 1, is the fifth public album by the group Two Steps From Hell, released in June 2013. It consists of 23 tracks written by composers Thomas J. Bergersen and Nick Phoenix. This album is the first of their public albums available in lossless audio. All songs except "Return from Darkness" and "Path to Earth" are from their previous demonstration albums. The album also features an extended version of "Eternal Sorrow" from the Nemesis album, as well as tweaked versions of "Magnan Imus", "White Witch", and "The World Is Mind".
The album was later re-released to the industry via Extreme Music, containing two new brand-new bonus tracks.


Track listing
Tracks 3, 8, 17, and 22 are reworked versions from their original releases.
Two slightly different versions of the album were released; the seventh track issued on iTunes and CD Baby is different to the seventh track issued via Amazon Music.


Critical reception
IFMCA-associated reviews website, MundoBSO, rated it six out of ten stars.


Charts


Use in media
Two Steps From Hell's music has been used frequently in movie trailers. 

Nemesis was used in TV spots for 2012.
Armada was used in the trailers for The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader, The Three Musketeers, The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon Emperor, and Mass Effect 3.
Sons of War was used in the trailer for Your Highness and commercials for some Marvel shows, such as Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the third season of the animated series Ultimate Spider-Man.
The Calgary Flames used this song in their 2011-2012 season opening video.
Asimov was used in an episode of The Innovators: The Men Who Built America.
White Witch was used in the second trailer for the first season of Penny Dreadful and the trailer for King Lear.
Magnan Imus was used in the second trailer for the first season of Penny Dreadful.


References


External links
Classics Volume One at Discogs

The Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Company supplied electricity to the Tees district and to south and west County Durham, England. It generated and supplied electricity from 1904, merged with Newcastle-upon-Tyne Electric Supply Company in 1917 and was dissolved in 1933.
See below for Cleveland and Durham Electric Power Limited.


History

The Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Company was established in 1901 under the provisions of the Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Act 1901 (1 Edw. 7. c. civ). Its powers, extended by the Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Act 1903 (3 Edw. 7. c. xxv), were to generate or acquire electricity and provide electricity for lighting and power purposes for users. The area of supply covered 820 square miles. By 1915 the company operated a generating station at Grangetown, Middlesbrough. This had a capacity of 6,000 kW. Energy was also supplied by waste heat stations at Newport, Weardale, Teesbridge, Port Clarence, and Ayresome. It also had agreements to exchange electricity with the Newcastle-upon-Tyne Electric Supply Company (NESCo) and County of Durham Electric Power Supply Company.


Directors
The directors in 1915 were:

James Falconer (chair)
R. W. Armstrong
Maurice Lowthian Bell
Robert James
Philip E. Noble
C. P. F. Pierret


Operations
The profits of the company were: £24,360 (1907); £38, 960 (1908); £52,800 (1909).
In 1922 the power station at Grangetown had boilers supplying 290,000 lb/hour of steam to drive four alternators as follows:
1 × 2 MW, 1 × 2.4 MW, 2 × 6.6 MW. Total generating capacity was 17.6 MW.
The company was dissolved in 1933 under the provisions of the North-Eastern Electric Supply Act 1932 (22 & 23 Geo. 5. c. xxxii).


Cleveland and Durham Electric Power Limited

Cleveland and Durham Electric Power Limited was registered on 18 July 1906. It was formed to acquire shares of the Cleveland and Durham County Electric Power Company and those of the Northern Counties Electricity Supply Company Limited. Its remit was to develop electric power in County Durham, Cleveland and parts of Northumberland.
In order to provide the finance, the company offered £1,000,000 share capital in July 1906.
The company was in financial difficulties and decided to take an electricity supply from the NESCo's Carville power station via a cable under the Tyne at Hebburn.
In 1915 the company had 486 consumers. The number of connections were 36,283 (1910); 40,460 (1911); 48,429 (1912); 55,133 (1913).


Directors
The directors were:

John Hobart Armstrong
Maurice Lowthian Bell
Charles Emmott
James Falconer
Robert James
John Davison Milburn
The Cleveland and Durham Company's share capital was fully acquired by NESCo in 1917.
The company was dissolved on 30 September 1932.


See also
List of pre-nationalisation UK electric power companies


References

Clube Rugby São Miguel is a rugby team based in the neighbourhood of São Miguel in Lisbon, Portugal. As of the 2012/13 season, they play in the Second Division of the Campeonato Nacional de Rugby (National Championship).


History
The club was founded in 1970. After a gap in activity the club returned to activity in 2009 following a large meeting of former players and families to celebrate the 40th anniversary of Afonso Costa Pereira.
In 2010 the club returned to competition with the senior team playing the II Division of the Portuguese Championship. In 2012-2013 the team finished 2nd and was promoted to the 1st Division. In 2017/2018 the senior team reached the final and almost got promoted to Honor Division however they lost against CRAV.


Squad 2023/24
According to Portuguese Rugby Federation


References


External links
Clube Rugby São Miguel

A coastal plain (also coastal plains, coastal lowland, coastal lowlands) is an area of flat, low-lying land adjacent to a sea coast. A fall line commonly marks the border between a coastal plain and an upland area.


Formation
Coastal plains can form in one of two ways; some begin as a continental shelf, a flat piece of land located below sea level, and are created when the ocean level falls, exposing the land. Others develop when river currents carry sediment into the ocean, which is deposited and builds up over time until it forms a coastal plain. They are generally separated from the rest of the interior by proximate landforms, like mountains.


Locations
Some of the largest coastal plains are in Alaska and the southeastern United States. The Gulf Coastal Plain of North America extends northwards from the Gulf of Mexico along the Lower Mississippi River to the Ohio River, which is a distance of about 981 miles (1,579 km). The Atlantic Coastal Plain runs from the New York Bight to Florida. 
The Coastal Plains of India lie on either side of the Deccan Plateau, along the western and eastern coasts of India. They extend for about 6,150 km from the Rann of Kutch in the west to West Bengal in the east. They are broadly divided into the Western Coastal Plains and the Eastern Coastal Plains. The two coastal plains meet at Kanyakumari, the southernmost tip of the Indian mainland. The eastern coastal plain is located between The Bay of Bengal and the eastern Ghats and the western coastal plain is located between the Arabian Sea and the western Ghats.
In Australia, there exists the South East Coastal Plain in Victoria that includes the Gippsland Plain, the eastern portion of Melbourne, Otway Plain and Warrnambool Plain subregions. The Gippsland Plain features the depressed coastal and alluvial plains, barrier dunes and swampy flatlands. They mostly consist of grassland and grassy woodlands on yellow and grey textured fertile soils. Another is the Swan Coastal Plain in Western Australia, which includes the city of Perth. It is one of the distinct physiographic provinces of the larger West Australian Shield division.


See also
Alluvial plain
Atlantic Plain
Coastal plains of Chile
Israeli coastal plain
Mississippi embayment
North European Plain


References

Cockle bread was an inferior type of British corn or wheat bread mixed with "cockle weed". In the 17th century a practice known as "moulding" cockle-bread had a sexual connotation. Cockle bread is also mentioned in a 19th-century nursery rhyme.


Cockle weed bread
The play The Old Wives' Tale by George Peele, first published in 1595, has a reference to "cockle-bread". The editor of a 20th-century edition of the play, Charles Whitworth, points to the "cockle" as a weed found in corn and wheat fields, and suggests that "cockle-bread" was possibly an inferior bread, made from those grains, with the weed mixed into it. William Carew Hazlitt writing in Faith and Folklore: a dictionary in 1905, gives the same explanation of "Cockle Bread" as Whitworth.


The "moulding" of cocklebread
In the 17th century, a sexual connotation is attached not to the bread itself but to "a dance that involved revealing the buttocks and simulating sexual activity"; this activity was known as "moulding" cockle bread.
John Aubrey writes of "young wenches" indulging in a "wanton sport" called "moulding of Cocklebread" where they would "get upon a Tableboard, and as they gather-up their knees and their Coates with their hands as high as they can, and then they wabble to and fro with the Buttocks as if they were kneading of Dough with their Arses". While doing this, the young women would sing the rhyme:

Aubrey compares this, writing "I did imagine nothing to have been in this but mere wantonness of youth ... but I find in Buchardus's book Methodus Confitendi ... one of the articles of interrogating a young woman is, if she did ever subjugere panem clunibus, and then bake it, and give it to the one she loved to eat". From this he decides "I find it to be a relic of natural magic, an unlawful philtrum" (i.e. aphrodisiac or love charm).
Writing in A Dictionary of Sexual Language and Imagery in Shakespearean and Stuart Literature, Gordon Williams sees Aubrey's "wanton sport" in a 1641 mention of moulding cocklebread, a "sexual sense" in a prayer mentioning the practice from 1683, and considers it "transparent" in the 1683 Fifteen Real Conforts Of Matrimony which "tells how 'Mrs. Betty has been Moulding of Cockle-bread, and her mother discovers it'; the consequence is a 'By-blow in her belly'".


Nursery rhyme
In the 19th and 20th centuries, Cockle-Bread became the name of a children's game, played to a nursery rhyme in which the bread is mentioned:

Writing in Observations on the Popular Antiquities of Great Britain in 1854, John Brand describes the nursery rhyme as "modern", but adds that its connection to the earlier "moulding" of cockle bread "is by no means generally understood".


See also
Cordax


References

Cofaco is a Portuguese canned fish company, headquartered in Lisbon with industrial facilities in the Azores.


History
In 1961, Cofaco was created in the Algarve. Its head office was in Vila Real de Santo António. The tuna fish is rare in the Algarve.  Cofaco fishes in the Azores where the tuna passes and its migration routes begin. Currently, Cofaco is mainly located in the Azores and its industrial poles are concentrated in the islands of Pico, (Madalena do Pico), and S. Miguel (Rabo de Peixe). Its main brands include Bom Petisco, pitéu, líder, Ás do Mar, Bon Appetit, and Santamaria.


See also
Fishing in Portugal


References


External links
Official site

"Come To Me" is a song by Ghanaian artist Sarkodie. It was released on September 8, 2017,  on iTunes by Sarkcess Music. The song, produced by Jayso, features vocals from UK artist, Bobii Lewis. The song is off Sarkodie's fifth studio album Highest.


Music video
The music video for "Come To Me" was released via Sarkodie's YouTube account on September 8, 2017, and has over 400,000 views.


Accolades


References


External links
Music video on YouTube

Coppenrath Verlag GmbH & Co KG is a German publishing house based in Münster, in the North Rhine-Westphalia region of Germany. It publishes primarily children's and young people's literature, together with various non-book and marketing products. Coppenrath is known for the children's book series Felix (children's books) by Annette Langen, and Princess Lillifee by Monika Finsterbusch. The publisher has also worked with Rolf Zuckowski in 2001. Coppenrath is known for its production of Advent calendars.


History
The publishing house was founded in Münster in 1768 when Joseph Heinrich Coppenrath took over the Perrenonschen Hofbuchhandlung. The business remained in the hands of Coppenrath family until 1977, when it was taken over by Wolfgang Hölker.
In 2018, the publisher moved its nearly 180 staff to a new nine-million-Euro building, Speicher 3, a former warehouse at the Kreativkai in the port of Münster.


Divisions
The Coppenrath publishing group publishes in four divisions. Firstly there is the Coppenrath Verlag itself, which is best known for its children's books, including the Lino-Bücher, a series of small books to be read by, or to, children. This series began in 2001 with fairy-tales; the first was the Italian story of Pinocchio. As of 2022, more than sixty have been published. The books are square, with a 12 × 12 cm format.
In 1992, Coppenrath began to sell children's games under the brand Die Spiegelburg, "The Mirror-Castle".
A number of games have been nominated for the children's section of the German "Spiel des Jahres" award, or appeared in its list of recommended games:

Mit Felix um die Welt ("With Felix around the world") by Kai Haferkamp was in the recommended list for 2006.
Capt’n Sharky – Abenteuer auf der Schatzinsel (Captain Sharky - the Adventure of the Treasure Island) by Kai Haferkamp was nominated in 2008.
Die Lieben Sieben – Ab auf die Wippe! (The lovely seven - Off on the seesaw!) by Anja Dreier-Brückner was on the recommended list in 2010.
The Hölker Verlag forms a third division, founded in 1972, and publishing regional cookery books, as well as modern books about food.
The remaining division, the Bohem Verlag, was founded in 1973 and publishes poetic picture-books.


External links
Website der Coppenrath Verlag GmbH & Co KG
Coppenrath Verlag in the games database, Luding


References

Cosmosoma admota is a moth of the family Erebidae. It was described by Gottlieb August Wilhelm Herrich-Schäffer in 1854. It is found in the Brazilian states of Pernambuco, Bahia, and Espírito Santo.


References

Cossington is a village within the Soar Valley in Leicestershire, England. It is between Sileby, Rothley, Ratcliffe-on-the-Wreake and Syston. The population of the civil parish at the 2011 census was 598.
The village's name means 'farm/settlement of Cusa/Cosa'.
Although there is no railway service (did have one) to Cossington, the Ivanhoe Line runs along the Midland Main Line between Leicester and Loughborough, passing close to the village. An hourly service is provided in both directions as part of East Midlands Railway Local service from Lincoln to Leicester via Nottingham. Many years ago there was a 'Cossington Gate railway station' which has long since gone, the only evidence remaining on old maps, The nearest stations now being at Syston and Sileby.
Cossington was once home to Lady Isobel Barnett, a radio and television personality from the mid 20th century, where she committed suicide amidst shoplifting charges. A short new road, Barnett Close, has been named in her memory.
The village is home to three small businesses; two garden centres (Derry's Nursery and Goscote Nursery) and a pub, The Royal Oak
In the early 1990s there were plans to expand the village, which were strongly opposed by the residents at the time, who formed the protest group 'Cossington In Distress'. The residents were successful in bringing about the cessation of the work and the village remains a peaceful community to this day.
Every alternate Easter the residents of Cossington open their gardens to the public for two days for the 'Secret Gardens of Cossington' in which the village's willing gardeners show off their talents, with all the proceeds of ticket sales going to charity. The event has been a massive success every time it has run.
The church of All Saints dates from the 13th century. A ‘Grant of Arms’ of the Fisher family displayed on the tower wall above the arch. There are memorial tablets to the Fisher family of which Geoffrey Fisher became Archbishop of Canterbury in the 1950s.
To the south of the village lies Platts Lane Recreation Ground (more simply known as just 'Platts Lane') which is owned by the Platts Lane Charitable Trust and run by a volunteer committee made up of mostly village residents. Platts Lane is basically a large playing field area and plays host to football, cricket and rugby matches - most notably being the home of Sileby Town Rugby Football Club who are also known as 'The Vikings' and play all their home fixtures at Platts Lane, which many locals enjoy watching.
Nearby is Ratcliffe College.
A notable native of Cossington was John Webster, governor of Connecticut Colony in 1656. John Webster's Great-great-great-grandson Noah Webster Jr Wrote what became the Merriam-Webster Dictionary around 1875
The Australian artist Grace Cossington Smith's mother (also Grace, née Fisher) was the daughter of a rector of Cossington from the Fisher family (see above).
To the east of the village there is a footpath named "Polly Peggs Footpath". Local village legend says a distressed girl drowned herself after falling pregnant whilst courting. Her lover, father and even the church abandoned her and she committed suicide.


References


External links
 Media related to Cossington, Leicestershire at Wikimedia Commons

Covadonga  (Asturian: Cuadonga, from cova domnica "Cave of Our Lady") is one of 11 parishes in Cangas de Onís, a municipality within the province and autonomous community of Asturias, in Northwestern Spain. It is in the Picos de Europa mountains. With a permanent population of 55, the parish became a site of pilgrimage and a place of great cultural importance following the 722 Battle of Covadonga, which marked the beginning of the Spanish Reconquista of the Iberian Peninsula. The battle, which supposedly took place near the village in 722, was the first Christian victory in the Iberian Peninsula over the Arabs invading from north Africa under the Umayyad banner, and is often considered to be the beginning of the almost eight-century-long effort to expel Muslim rulers governing Iberia during the Reconquista. However, many modern historians do now dispute the importance of the battle and whether or not it even took place at all.
The two lakes of Covadonga, Enol and Ercina, are located in the mountains above the town, and the road leading to the lakes is often featured in the Vuelta a España bicycle race. The Holy Cave of Covadonga is a monument dedicated to Our Lady of Covadonga that commemorates the Battle of Covadonga. It comprises the following:

Basílica de Santa María la Real de Covadonga ("Basilica of Saint Mary the Royal of Covadonga"), a church built in the 19th century based on a design by Roberto Frassinelli;
Santa Cueva de Covadonga ("Holy Cave of Covadonga"), in which the bodies of Kings Pelagius and Alfonso I lie;
Collegiate church of Nuestra Señora de Covadonga, built in the 16th century and declared a Bien de Interés Cultural ("Property of Cultural Interest") in 1884;
Monasterio de San Pedro ("Monastery of Saint Peter"); and
Esplanade, with the Museum of the Real Sitio de Covadonga ("Royal Site of Covadonga").


Gallery


See also
Battle of Covadonga


References


External links

Covadonga
Real sitio de Covadonga

The Craigleith Heritage Depot is a museum, library, tourism and community hub serving The Blue Mountains, Ontario in partnership with The Town of The Blue Mountains Public Library and is the last remaining station standing on Canada's first long-line railroad. It is located on the corner of Highway 26 and Grey Road 19 on the south side of Georgian Bay. Erected in the 1880s, the Craigleith Heritage Depot was originally a train station called Craigleith Station, then a restaurant called The Depot, currently it is a museum and an adjoined public library. Displays in the museum showcase the history of the Petun First Nations, Craigleith Station, Blue Mountain Pottery, the Township of Collingwood, the Mary Ward (ship), fossils found in Craigleith, the local apple industry, Craigleith Oil Works, Osler Castle, local war memorabilia, and old newspaper articles. Some of the many exhibits currently in storage include Canada's largest private collection of railroad documents  and one of the world's largest cigar-band collections.


History


Train station
The Northern Railway of Canada acquired the parcel of land that The Craigleith Heritage Depot currently occupies from Sandford and Andrew Fleming in 1872. Sandford Fleming was one of the chief surveyors for the railway and he persuaded his father Andrew Fleming to donate the 9.8 acres (0.040 km2) to the railway. The lot is located on a Native trail surveyed by Charles Rankin in 1834. By September 1872, the Collingwood to Meaford branch of the Northern Railway (aka the North Grey Extension Company, or North Grey Railway) was operating, and by 1881, five trains were arriving at Craigleith's platform stop each day.
In 1882, the Northern Railway company was purchased by the Grand Trunk Railway. The Craigleith Station building was constructed from local timber and included at the time a modern feature in railway design, the rounded turret. There are only two turreted stations left in Ontario, with Craigleith being the only one in its original state. The station's dwelling and waiting room was constructed in 1889 with sill foundation, shingle roof, frame and dimensions 26 ft (7.9 m) by 28 ft (8.5 m), height 12 ft (3.7 m). The addition's diameters were 12.5 ft (3.8 m) by 26 ft (7.9 m), height 8 ft (2.4 m). The tower was 8 ft (2.4 m) diameter, height 17 ft (5.2 m). The shed was 12 ft (3.7 m) by 20 ft (6.1 m), height 9 ft (2.7 m). In 1898, the stable was built with frame, shingle roof and dimensions of 12 ft (3.7 m) by 16 ft (4.9 m), height 12 ft (3.7 m). The addition was 17 ft (5.2 m) by 12 ft (3.7 m), height 7 ft (2.1 m) with a 1,680 ft2 (156 m2) platform constructed in 1898. Inside the station there were separate waiting rooms for men and women as well as living quarters for the stationmaster and his family. The train conductor lived on site with his wife and family.
In 1860, Edward VII, son of Queen Victoria, travelled to Canada for a visit. Almost every station between Toronto and Collingwood had erected spectacular floral arches beneath which the prince passed in his open observation car. In 1974 when a special excursion of hundreds of railway fans retraced the route taken by the prince, a member of the planning committee suggested a revival of the floral arches, however only Craigleith decided to put up the arches. In an attempt to hold back the lilac blossoms, they were stored in a local apple storage plant. On the evening before the train trip, post diggers went to work to dig holes for the arches and accidentally severed the cable which controlled the railway signals for miles. Warning bells and red lights went out of control for the next 12 hours. In addition, a heavy rainstorm during the night destroyed the Lilac Arch. No towns have been persuaded to participate in the revival of the floral arch since.
Phillis Gertrude Wilson was born at the depot in 1909. Her grandfather was the track master George Wilson. Helen Speck Gibson was also born at the depot on February 23, 1922, when her father, Alan Speck was the stationmaster. In the 1960s, Dr. Sandford Goodchild used the depot as a cottage and after rail service ended, the station was purchased by a former mayor of Collingwood who also used it as a cottage for many years.
Presently hung on the wall is an original document from the General Roadmaster dated May 6, 1902, outlining the wages of the railway station workers. The foreman at the Depot received $45.00 per month. All regular section laborers received $1.20 per day. The foreman rates covered all services performed, there was no allowance for overtime.


Tourism
The ski industry was one of the businesses which benefited by the railway stop. In the 1940s, ski facilities were opened to the public, along with the creation of private ski facilities. Skiers could take a 7:00am train from Union Station to Craigleith Station, then board the Weider horse-drawn sleigh for 25 cents which would go right to the ski hill now called Blue Mountain. Father Don Plater drove the sled. The ski train service was suspended in 1942 due to the war effort and shortage of rail transportation. Service to Craigleith Station resumed after World War II in 1947 and continued until the 1960s when transportation by automobile drastically reduced ridership. In 1991, the neighboring railway corridor was secured by the Ontario Trails Council and is now the Georgian Trail.


Restaurant
In 1966, Ken and Suyrea Knapman purchased and restored the building and opened a restaurant on October 26, 1968, naming it The Depot. On September 23, 1996, the couple were presented the Ontario Heritage Foundation Community Heritage Award by Collingwood Township's Reeve Ross Arthur in recognition of their preservation efforts.
They put The Depot up for sale in 1998 when Mr. Knapman's health problems became serious, but they were determined to find a purchaser who would preserve the building. Ken Knapman died due to heart complications. For two years after, Suyrea struggled to keep the restaurant going, hoping that an investor would come along who was committed to preserving the building.
The Craigleith Heritage Ridge Project and supporters met with the Town of the Blue Mountains council to encourage the town to buy the building. Following the meeting, council attempted to purchase it but wanted only the building and not the rest of the property. Fearing splitting the parcel would result in the remaining land being difficult to sell, the Town could not come to an agreement with Suryea Knapman and she sold the building to Roger Lockhart, who was under no obligation to preserve the historic building. Lockhart applied for rezoning and severances of the depot's land. The application was approved and the land was severed into four blocks of land just east of the depot for building lots.


Museum
In 2001, with the support of the Craigleith Heritage Committee and many concerned citizens, the Craigleith Depot was purchased by the Town of the Blue Mountains for $380,000, with $350,000 being contributed by the municipality and Craigleith Heritage Committee, and $30,000 by the Blue Mountain Watershed Trust. In September 2001, a Visibility Strategy was undertaken and presented to the Town of the Blue Mountains regarding what was to become of the Craigleith Depot. The successful option was to turn The Depot into a heritage centre and trailhead with a commercial component. The Craigleith Heritage Committee and Blue Mountain Watershed Trust undertook many years of fundraising to ensure the building could be fully restored and reopened to the public as The Craigleith Heritage Depot Community Interpretation Centre.
The building has kept the original flooring from the train station. It is evident on this flooring where visitors and travelers have frequently walked.


Library
The Craigleith Heritage Depot joined with the Town of the Blue Mountains Public Library in 2016. The decision to unite the museum with the library was controversial.
There is an ongoing project at the Craigleith Heritage Depot called Then and Now, it includes images and video of local history, including an interview with Mrs. Helen Speck Gibson who was born in the Craigleith Railway Station as her father was the station master.


The Lilac Bushes
Outside the railway station there are Lilacs from the local Fleming's farm, it is believed they were brought here from Scotland by the Fleming family.
Planted in 1901 by Stationmaster Wilson's wife, the lilacs have become a signature of the depot. Some say the lilacs were planted there because Wilson's wife was congratulating him on the job of station agent, some say they were there to cover the smell of the outhouses outside the train station, some say they were given as a gift, others say they were planted to remind her of her native Britain. Either way the stationmaster's wife, Phylis Wilson, went to get the original lilac roots and planted them.
The lilacs took off impeccably around the depot. They were cared for by the stationmasters and the Knapmans, who provided cuttings to those who wanted to take some home lilacs home without hurting the bushes. The Depot restaurant has also put on a two-week Lilac Festival.
The lilacs at the depot have since become an Ontario landmark, and the road immediately south of the depot is now called Lilac Lane.


Heritage Protection
The building has been protected under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act, so designated by the Town of the Blue Mountains since 2003. The Notice of Intention to Designate the building notes "The property is considered for designation under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act, chapter 0.18, R.S.O. 1990, as amended, as representing both an historical site and as a substantially original example of late 19th century rail road station architecture. An original settler of Craigleith, Andrew Grieg Fleming, father of Sandford Fleming, donated land for a railway station and right-of-way in Craigleith, and it is believed the Craigleith Station was built in about 1878. Sandford Fleming went on to a career as a railway construction engineer, and as well developed the program of Standard Time in use today. The site includes a still thriving stand of lilacs, known throughout the area, thought originally imported from Scotland and planted by the Fleming family. Following steady rail and Station service, including the famous ski trains that helped develop the area ski industry and as recognized by the Canadian Ski Museum, passenger rail service was terminated in 1960."


References


External links
Craigleith Heritage Depot

The Crater Glacier (also known as Tulutson Glacier) is a geologically young glacier on Mount St. Helens, in the U.S. state of Washington. The glacier formed after the 1980 eruption and due to its location, the body of ice grew rapidly, unknown to the public for nearly 20 years. The glacier once contained ice caves in the smooth ice before the 2004–2008 volcanic activity. The growth of the lava dome and volcanic eruptions from 2004 to 2008 significantly altered the appearance of the glacier. In the same time period, several agencies decided to put an official name on the glacier which, at first, was Tulutson Glacier. A later decision made Crater Glacier the official glacier name. Despite the volcanic activity, the glacier continued to advance and by mid-2008, the glacier completely encircled the lava domes. In addition, new glaciers (rock or ice) have formed around Crater Glacier as well.


Description
True to its name, the glacier lies inside the north-facing crater left by the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens and the glacier's elevation is about 6,794 ft (2,071 m). A massive central lava dome emplaced from 1980 to 1987 occupies the center of the crater, and the glacier formed in the shape of a horseshoe around the dome, with two terminal moraines on the eastern and western sides.  Heavy winter snowfall, repeated snow avalanches, rockfalls, and sun-shading by the surrounding cliffs to the south, led to the exceptionally rapid growth of this glacier. Thus, the glacier composition is estimated to be 60% ice and 40% rock, with an average thickness of 328 feet (100 m) and a maximum thickness of around 656 feet (200 m); nearly as deep as Mount Rainier's Carbon Glacier. None of the ice is older than the year 1980, but by 2001 the volume of the new glacier was about 40%-50% as large as all the pre–1980 glaciers combined.  The surface of the glacier looks dark and dirty in the summer due to the numerous rockfalls from the steep, unstable crater walls along with ash from eruptions, all of which help to insulate and protect the growing glacier. The 2004-2008 volcanic activity created a series of domes that nearly split the glacier into two lobes at the south end of the crater. In spite of the four-year lava dome building period, the glacier remains North America's youngest and fastest growing glacier. With the joining of the termini on the north end of Crater Glacier in May 2008, the body of ice completely encircles the lava domes. Meltwater from the glacier gives rise to Loowit Creek.

Pre-2004 eruption glacier caves of Crater Glacier

In 2000, glacier caves were discovered on the then-smooth glacier surface. Many of these glacier caves were big enough to explore, like the glacier caves on the summit of Mount Rainier. Most of the glacier caves were located near the 1980s lava dome, where hot steam and volcanic gas emissions from hidden fumaroles on the crater floor or lava dome melted holes in the young glacial ice. About 7,900 feet or 2.4 km of caves and passageways in the glacier were mapped and studied.

Other glaciers and new rock glaciers
Since 2004, new glaciers have formed on the crater wall above Crater Glacier feeding rock and ice to Crater Glacier below. In addition, there are two rock glaciers to the north of the eastern lobe of Crater Glacier and one north of the western lobe. Two of these rock glaciers have merged with the Crater Glacier, with one on the west and one on the east. The other rock glacier on the eastern slopes of the crater wall is very close to touching the glacier.


Evolution
In the months after the eruption, the crater floor of St. Helens remained hot and unstable, with five minor volcanic eruptions, and lava dome construction between May and October 1980. After the eruptions ceased in the winter of 1980, the crater floor cooled down enough for snow and ice accumulation. Beginning with snowfall in the winter of 1980-1981, the glacier began to grow very rapidly in the shadow of the crater. The glacier thickened at a rate of as high as 50 ft (15 m) per year and advanced northward as much as 135 ft (41 m) a year. This glacier growth was discovered by scientists working in the crater about seven to nine years later. However, the existence of the glacier was not publicized until 1999. By 2004, Crater Glacier covered about 0.36 square mile (0.93 km2), about 20% of the glacier area in the pre-1980 glaciers, and there was a western and eastern lobe flowing around the 1980s dome. Due to the gas emissions on the crater floor, there were glacier caves (ice caves) in the once smooth glacial ice, and several of them had been explored by the late 1990s.
With the volcanic activity from 2004 to 2008, the glacier lobes were pushed aside and overthickened by the growth of new volcanic domes. As the two streams of ice were compressed between the crater wall and the new lava domes, the ice moved rapidly downhill, much like the squeezing of toothpaste out of a container. This resulted in a very rapid advance of the glacier termini; first the western glacier arm merged with the rock glacier on the western crater wall and then, both arms of the Crater Glacier joined north 1980s lava dome in May 2008, despite the volcanic activity. In addition, the volcanic activity modified the surface of the glacier and transformed it from being mostly crevasse-free to being a chaotic jumble of icefalls heavily criss-crossed with crevasses and seracs due to movement of the crater floor and lava dome growth. At the south end, the new domes almost split the Crater Glacier into two separate glaciers and melted 10% in volume of the glacier's ice. However, cold rock on the edge of the glacier insulated the glacier ice from the 1,300 °F (700 °C) lava spewing out of the lava domes, easing concerns of a catastrophic lahar caused by glacier melting. The porous nature of the crater floor also reduced the amount of meltwater flowing out of the crater.
After the volcanic activity of the 2000s, the thickness of the glacier continues to increase at a slower rate of 15 ft (5 m) per year and the glacier continues to advance at 3 ft (1 m) per day. The latest aerial imagery taken in 2012 shows that the glacier has entered the upper reaches of the Loowit Creek canyon and the headwaters of the creek. Ice mixed with rock debris now spills into the canyon and the creek has been pushed to the east. Nearby, on the slopes of the eastern crater wall, the glacier touches one of the rock glaciers and the glacier is very close to merging with the other rock glacier. A medial moraine can be seen at the interface of the eastern and western arms of the Crater Glacier.

Glacier Evolution in the Crater


Naming
Since the glacier was first observed to be forming and actively flowing in the late 1980s, most scientists working on the mountain have referred to it informally as the "crater glacier".  That name has been in wide use with the public (at least those who were aware of the glacier's existence) for the two decades since the glacier formed, and has appeared in several scientific publications too.  A single scientific paper, the most complete published study of the glacier to date, referred to it as the "Amphitheater glacier," but that name has not been used otherwise.
Despite numerous observations and publications about the growing glacier in the late 1990s and early 2000s, no move was made to give the glacier a permanent and official name until late 2004, after the current eruptive cycle began and the new dome began to split the glacier.  At that time, a proponent from the Cowlitz tribe suggested the name "Tulutson Glacier," from the Cowlitz language word for ice.  In March 2005, the Washington State Board on Geographic Names chose Tulutson over three other contenders (Crater, Spirit, and Tamanawas), 
and so Tulutson Glacier became the de facto name.
However, the U.S. Board on Geographic Names had yet to make its decision, which would be official throughout the United States. The name Tulutson Glacier was submitted for consideration, along with Crater Glacier and Kraffts Glacier, which would have honored the volcanologists Katia and Maurice Krafft, killed by a pyroclastic flow in 1991. In June 2006, the U.S. BGN chose Crater Glacier because of its two-decade precedent of common use, despite objections from the state of Washington and the United States Forest Service which both preferred Tulutson. The scientists at the USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory strongly supported Crater Glacier, and also commented that Tulutson may not be an appropriate name since the volcano "lies inland in a region where the native language was not Cowlitz but Sahaptin."  

After the decision, some controversy erupted following an editorial in a local newspaper protesting the decision, and the state of Washington "has indicated that the name Tulutson Glacier will continue to appear on State products, although if the feature melts soon, as is anticipated, this may not be a great concern." Despite these protests, the glacier's official name remained Crater Glacier, though  shortly after their June 2006 decision, the BGN received a follow-up proposal to name the two arms of the glacier, East Crater Glacier and West Crater Glacier. This was because, at that point in time, the dome-building eruptions had nearly split the glacier into an east and west arm. No further action has been taken on this matter and the merging of the ice streams north of the 1980s lava dome has rendered this move unnecessary.


See also
List of glaciers


References


External links
Crater Glacier on TopoQuest
Video, by USGS

Cronulla Beach (sometimes referred to as South Cronulla Beach), is a patrolled beach on Bate Bay in the Sydney suburb of Cronulla, New South Wales, Australia. The Cronulla Pavilion and the Cronulla Lifesaving Club are two prominent buildings located close to the sand. Cronulla Park sits behind the beach. The Cronulla Rock Pools are between Cronulla Beach and North Cronulla beach. The Alley is the local name given to the area between Cronulla Beach and North Cronulla Beach. Shark Island is a dangerous reef break, located off Cronulla Beach.


History
Cronulla is derived from an Aboriginal word kurranulla, meaning 'place of pink seashells'.


Cronulla Surf Life Saving Club

The Cronulla Surf Life Saving Club, was one of the first surf clubs established in Australia in 1907. The club started out in a tram carriage and today it is housed in an art deco building on the beachfront, that was built in 1940.
Cronulla is one of the largest and strongest clubs in the surf life saving movement with 1,200 members, including 620 in its nipper ranks. Many lifesavers volunteer their time to patrol the beaches during the season from late September to late April. Cronulla has won three World Championships encompassing all rescue and Surf Life Saving competition and has consistently placed in the top 10 clubs at the Australian championships over the past 20 years.


Sport and recreation
The Australian Boardriders Battle and Shark Island Challenge are held on Cronulla Beach.


Pop culture
Cronulla beach came to international prominence with the novel and film Puberty Blues. Subsequently there Puberty Blues was made into a television serial also produced in the area as was "The Principal".


Gallery


See also
Beaches in Sydney
Wanda Sand dunes
Guide to Sydney Beaches
"Sand in our Souls - the Beach in Australian History" Leone Huntsman, MUP, 2001
2005 Cronulla riots


References


External links
Beach Lifestyle - Sydney.com

Cui Ren (Chinese: 崔仁; Korean: 최인; born 19 January 1989 in Yanji) is a Chinese former footballer who played as a midfielder.


Club career
Cui Ren was promoted to China League One side Yanbian FC in 2007. On 29 March 2009, he made his senior debut in a 2–1 away defeat against Shanghai East Asia. On 26 September 2009, he scored his first senior goal in a 3–1 away defeat against Sichuan FC. Cui was linked with another League One club Qingdao Hainiu by the end of 2013 season; however, Yanbian refused his transfer request.
On 9 February 2015, Cui moved to Chinese Super League side Shanghai Shenxin on a free transfer. He made his Super League debut on 15 March 2015, in the second match of the season against Shanghai SIPG, coming on as a substitute for Everton.
On 1 January 2016, Cui returned to Yanbian after Shanghai Shenxin's relegation. He transferred to China League One side Zhejiang Greentown on 1 March 2019 after Yanbian Funde was disqualified for the 2019 season due to owing taxes. He would make his debut for Zhejiang in a league game on 10 March 2019 against Qingdao Huanghai in a 2-1 defeat. After three seasons with the club he would aid them to promotion to the top tier at the end of the 2021 campaign. Cui retired from professional football at the end of the 2021 season after being unable to recover from a cruciate ligament tear and cartilage damage.


Career statistics
Statistics accurate as of match played 27 April 2022.


References


External links
Cui Ren at Soccerway

Curtis Pulley (born December 19, 1986) is an American former football quarterback for the Florida A&M University Rattlers. Pulley used to be a quarterback and wide receiver for the University of Kentucky Wildcats. He was selected as the 2004 Kentucky Mr. Football.


Early life
Pulley was born on December 19, 1986, in Laurens, South Carolina. He moved to Kentucky when he was in the first grade. As a four-year letterman and three-year starter at quarterback and safety at Hopkinsville High School, his career passing statistics were 379 completions in 737 attempts for 6,016 yards and 62 touchdowns. His rushing totals include 487 attempts for 3,043 yards and 54 touchdowns. As a defensive back, he accounted for 155 tackles, 10 interceptions (two returned for touchdowns), two fumble recoveries (one for touchdown), and 13 pass breakups.
In 2004, Pulley was named Kentucky's Mr Football.


College career
After holding the starting position for the Kentucky Wildcats football coming out of Spring Camp in 2006, QB Andre Woodson beat him for the spot in the fall.  For the 2006 season, Pulley served as the backup quarterback, occasional wide receiver, and special teams kick blocker for the Wildcats. He left the team for the spring semester 2007, but later re-enrolled for the Fall.  He decided to redshirt the 2007 season and try to regain the starting spot in 2008. He was considered one of the top athletes on the team, and at 6'4 212 lbs, can play either receiver or Quarterback.
On August 5, 2008, Curtis Pulley was dismissed from the Kentucky Wildcat football team as a result of marijuana charges and an arrest for traffic charges including speeding, driving on a suspended or revoked license and having expired or no plates or registration papers.
Pulley has since transferred to Florida A&M University. He was named MEAC Offensive Player of the Year in 2009.


References

Dacrydium elatum is a species of conifer in the family Podocarpaceae. It is found in Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam.
It is a tree up to 30 metres (98 ft) tall, with dbh up to 80 centimetres (31 in).


References

Dal is a male given name, surname, and nickname.
In the Balkans, Dal has recently become one of the most popular names for newborn males among Bosniaks in the former Yugoslav nations. The name is the male version of the popular female name Dalia. In Serbo-Croatian, Dal/Dalia translates to dahlia (a type of flower). The name gained popularity around the same time as the male-given name Mak, which translates to poppy (another type of flower).
Dal is also popular in Asian countries, specifically Nepal.


Given name
Dal Bahadur (fl. 2017), Indian politician
Dal Bahadur Gurung (1922–1992), Nepalese person mistaken for an imaginary character
Dal Bahadur Rana (fl. from 2008), Nepalese politician
Dal Bahadur Sunar (born 1959), Nepalese politician
Dal Collins (1907–2001), South African cricket umpire
Dal Joon Lee (1939–2010), American table tennis player
Dal Mardan Shah (r. 1764–1765), Nepalese king of the Malla state of Patan
Dal Millington Lemmon (1887–1958), American judge
Dal Shealy (born 1938), American football player
Dal Singh (politician) (1915–1991), Indian politician
Dal Singh Thapa, Nepalese Congress leader imprisoned for a 1961 assassination attempt
Dal Stivens (1911–1997), Austrian writer
Dal Varešanović (born 2001), Bosnian footballer


Surname
Nedim Dal (Edin Delić, born 1975), Bosnian-born Turkish basketball player
Oleg Dal (1941–1981), Soviet actor
Vladimir Dal (1801–1872), Russian lexicographer


Nickname
Dal Dozzi (1936–2012), Australian rules footballer Adelio Paul Dozzi
Dal Maxvill (born 1939), American baseball player Charles Dallan Maxvill
Dal Stivens (1911–1997), Australian writer Dallas George Stivens


References

Dale Susan Fischer (born October 17, 1951) is a senior United States district judge of the United States District Court for the Central District of California.


Early life and education
Fischer was born in Orange, New Jersey. She received her Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of South Florida in 1977, and her Juris Doctor from Harvard Law School in 1980.


Private practice
Fischer was in private practice in California for 17 years, from 1980 to 1997, during which she also volunteer briefly for the Los Angeles City Attorney's Office.  She practiced as a business litigator at the law firms Heller Ehrman and Kindel & Anderson.


Judicial career


State judicial service
Fischer was a judge on the Los Angeles Municipal Court from 1997 to 2000, hearing criminal cases. She was then a judge on the Los Angeles County Superior Court, hearing criminal cases from 2000 to 2003.


Federal judicial service
On May 1, 2003, Fischer was nominated by President George W. Bush to a new seat on the United States District Court for the Central District of California created by 116 Stat. 1758. She was confirmed by the United States Senate on October 27, 2003, and received her commission on November 5, 2003. She assumed senior status on May 1, 2024.


Notable cases
In 2008, she oversaw the case of private investigator Anthony Pellicano. Fischer sentenced Pellicano to 15 years in prison for running an illegal wiretapping operation, wiretapping billionaire Kirk Kerkorian's former wife. The sentence significantly exceeded the five-year, 10-month term recommended by probation officials.
In 2018, Judge Fischer issued a nationwide injunction and receivership over West H&A-a company who had frauduently hijacked more than 2,000 defaulted mortgages nationwide and coinvinced the distressed borrowers to begin paying their mortgage payments to West H&A instead of their real lender.  Nationstar Mortage LLC, represented by Jered Ede and Jane Kutepova, sought and obtained the first-of-its kind injunction and receivership after discovering several of its borrowers had begun paying West H&A thinking they had cured their defaults.  West H&A was operated by Patrick Soria, who Fischer found in civil and criminal contempt after Nationstar demonstrated Soria had violated Judge Fischer's order.  Soria was then prosecuted by the DOJ.  In 2021, Soria was sentenced to more than 12 years in prison for orchestrating the fraud scheme causing more than $7 million in losses.  Fischer said the scheme was "the most brazen and heartless" she had presided over in her career.  
In 2023 the criminal securities fraud case of Terren Peizer, the CEO and chairman of publicly traded healthcare company Ontrak, was assigned to Fischer. After Peizer was charged with insider trading by the SEC, which alleged that he sold $20 million of Ontrak stock while he was in possession of material nonpublic negative information related to the company’s largest customer, the U.S. Department of Justice announced criminal charges of securities fraud against Peizer, charging that thereby he had avoided $12 million in losses. Peizer was convicted of insider trading and securities fraud, and could face up to 65 years in prison.


References


External links

Dale S. Fischer at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges, a publication of the Federal Judicial Center.

David Gilmour (born 9 February 1971) is a former international badminton player from Scotland who competed at the Commonwealth Games.


Biography
Gilmour born in 1971, and a production planner by profession, was based in Hamilton, South Lanarkshire and represented Scotland at international level.
After two seasons recovering from a serious injury, Gilmour returned to competition in late 1993, despite being told by doctors that he would not play at elite level again and subsequently won the Scottish invitational singles, Dunfermline Open and East of Scotland Championships in January 1994.
The following season in 1995, he went on to become the number 1 ranked player in Scotland and in 1997 won the mixed doubles title with Elinor Middlemiss at the Scottish National Badminton Championships.
Gilmour represented the Scottish team at the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he competed in the badminton events.
He won four men's doubles championships with Craig Robertson and Andrew Bowman respectively at the Scottish National Badminton Championships.
His niece is Scottish international badminton player Kirsty Gilmour.


References

Debbi Wilkes (born December 16, 1946) is a Canadian former pair skater. With skating partner Guy Revell, she became a two-time Canadian national champion, the 1963 North American champion, and the 1964 Olympic silver medallist.


Personal life
Wilkes was born on December 16, 1946, in Toronto. She graduated from York University with an honors degree in psychology and then earned a master's degree in communications at Michigan State University. She is currently married to Bruce McEwan.


Career
On the ice by the age of five, Wilkes took up pairs at age ten and skated with her first partner until he quit.
She began skating with Guy Revell, six years her elder, in 1958 after meeting at the Unionville skating carnival. Though their height difference was adequate at the start of their partnership, by the time Wilkes was seventeen in 1963, her height was 5 feet 5 inches (165 cm) to Revell's 5 feet 4 inches (163 cm). They were coached by Bruce Hyland at Crosby Arena and represented the Unionville Skating Club throughout their career.
Wilkes fell from a lift while posing for press photographs prior to the 1963 World Championships, hitting the ice head-first and fracturing her skull. The pair had to withdraw from the competition.
Wilkes/Revell were awarded the bronze medal at the 1964 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck, while gold went to Ludmila Belousova / Oleg Protopopov and silver to Marika Kilius / Hans-Jürgen Bäumler. After taking the bronze at the 1964 World Championships in Dortmund, the pair parted ways — Wilkes decided to pursue an education while Revell elected to tour professionally in ice shows.
In 1966, Wilkes/Revell were informed that the silver medallists in Innsbruck, Marika Kilius / Hans-Jürgen Bäumler of Germany, had been disqualified after an International Olympic Committee investigation found they had signed pro contracts before the Olympics. IOC executive James Worrall presented Wilkes/Revell with the silver medals during the Canadian Championships in Peterborough, Ont. Later, Kilius/Baumler were reinstated in the record books, but the medals were never redistributed. In December 2013, after an investigation by The New York Times, the International Olympic Committee confirmed that Kilius/Bäumler and Wilkes/Revell share the 1964 Olympic silver medal and Joseph/Joseph of the United States are the bronze medallists. Despite the information on its website over the years, the IOC stated that this was intended to be the official result since 1987.
After retiring from competition, Wilkes became a television skating analyst, an author, a coach, and Skate Canada's Director of Marketing and Sponsorship.


Results

(with Revell)


References

Decaturville is an unincorporated community in Warren Township, Camden County, Missouri, United States. It is located on Route 5 approximately seven miles south-southeast of Camdenton. The Camden-Laclede county line is less than one mile south of the community.
The community was founded in 1854 and is named after Commodore Stephen Decatur Jr., (1779 – 1820), an American naval officer notable for his heroism in actions at Tripoli, Libya in the First Barbary War, the Second Barbary War, and in the War of 1812.


See also
Decaturville crater


References

Dola may refer to:

Dola (mythology), protective spirits in Polish mythology
Dola, Ohio, United States
Dola, Shahdol, India
Dola, Gabon, a department of Gabon
Dola, Burkina Faso
Dola Dunsmuir (1903–1966), Canadian socialite
DOLA, the Department of Land Administration
Dola, the international version of Doubao


See also
All pages with titles containing Dola
Dola Hill Stadium, Zambia
Doli (disambiguation)

Donatım, also known as Derkevank (Armenian: Դերքեվանք, romanized: Derk'evank, Kurdish: Tirkwank), is a village of Muş District, Muş Province, Eastern Anatolia in Turkey. Its population is 779 in 2022.


History
Human settlement has happened in the area for about 10,000 years.  During the Middle Ages, The area was the center of the Taron kingdom region of Armenia.  In the late 8th century the area came under control of the Armenian Bagratid (Bagratuni) dynasty, until it was
captured and annexed to the Byzantine Empire in 969. Haspet castle is located on a hill in Donatım. In the 11th century, the town was ruled by Islamic dynasties such as the Ahlatshahs, then in the 16th the Ottomans took control over the area.
In 1890, the records of the Armenian church indicate there were 89 Armenian households in Terkevank and an estimate of 40 Kurdish households.  In 1910, the church records saw a reduction in christian households to 67 but on the eve of the Armenian church records show Armenians in 96 households.
The town had a church dedicated to Saint Toros.
During the Armenian genocide of 1915 the indigenous Armenian population of the region was exterminated.


References

Donna "Wolf Mother" Abbott is the first woman chief of the Nause-Waiwash Band of Indians and the first woman chief known in Maryland state history. In 2025, Abbott was named to the Maryland Women's Hall of Fame.


Biography
Abbott was raised in Robbins, a small community in Dorchester County, Maryland. She grew up in a family that worked on the water, fishing, and trapping. Abbott attended Chesapeake College and spent thirty years in a career in radiology.


Nause-Waiwash Band of Indians
In 1988, a nonprofit organization named the Nause-Waiwash Band of Indians was formed by descendants from the Nanticoke and Choptank tribes. The Nause-Waiwash Band of Indians aims to recognize traditions of Eastern shore Native people, raise awareness and bring tribal people together. The group is represented on the Maryland Commission on Indian Affairs, but is not recognized by the state as a tribe. Abbott joined the group in the early 2000s and began to investigate its history. She also served as Treasurer and Secretary.


Leadership
In 2014, the band's first chief, Sewell Edward "Winterhawk" Fitzhugh passed away. Abbot was encouraged to run for the position as chief. Abbott was elected as chief of the band in 2015. Upon her appointment, Abbott was recognized as the first woman chief of a Maryland tribe in known history.
As chief, Abbott works to promote the Nause-Waiwash, organizes the band's summer gathering, and advocates for Native American history to be taught in local schools.  Abbott is vocal about the role that climate change impacts the Eastern Shore lands that members of the tribe have long inhabited.
As chief, Abbott served on the Maryland Commission on Indian Affairs for six years. In her role, Abbott has described facing criticism for her gender and for passing as white. Abbott is one of the women depicted on the Dorchester Women's Mural that was unveiled in 2022.
In 2025, Abbott was named to the Maryland Women's Hall of Fame.


See also
Native American identity in the United States
List of organizations that self-identify as Native American tribes
Indigenous peoples of Maryland
Hughes A.M.E. Chapel, property acquired by the tribe and used as a longhouse


References

Downtown Culiacán is the second urban sector and the central business district in the central area of Culiacán, Sinaloa, Mexico. The area features many of the city's operational offices, supermarkets, and necessary stores. It is the heart of Culiacán, the point where the city was born and, at present, the hub of transportation.


Places of interest


Churches


Basílica de Nuestra Señora del Rosario
Basilica of Our Lady of the Rosary - The construction of the city's cathedral began on May 22, 1842, under the direction of Bishop Lázaro de la Garza y Ballesteros. Construction was completed in 1885, and on January 12, 1975, this church was elevated to the status of a basilica by Pope Paul VI.


Santuario del Sagrado Corazón de Jesús
Sanctuary of the Sacred Heart of Jesus - Located in downtown, at the junction of Ángel Flores Street and Donato Guerra Street, the Santuario del Sagrado Corazón de Jesús was built in 1908. The work was undertaken by the priest Jesús María Echavarría, with the design by Luis F. Molina.


Culture


Centro Cultural Genaro Estrada
It is a complex of buildings comprising theaters, an art school, galleries, and a cinema. Since its inception, the Centro Cultural Genaro Estrada has been an essential space for the development of Sinaloa's cultural life. Opened in 1980 to encourage artistic and cultural activity in the state, it has served as a forum for developing a wide range of cultural programs for all ages.

It is located on a city block, surrounded by Rafael Buelna Street, Ave. Ruperto Paliza, Ave. Jesus Andrade and Paseo Niños Heroes, adjacent to the Old Waterfront of the Tamazula River.


Casino de la Cultura
It opened on June 5, 1943, as Casino Culiacán, and it marked the beginning of the city's architectural and urban modernity. An example of the sobriety of engineering in its Art Deco architectural style. The building was, for nearly three decades, the most important social center in the region.
Since the 1970s, the building has been abandoned by its partners. However, despite serving as an undisputed meeting place for the local society for many years, the casino was seized in 1994 by a municipal expropriation decree, which preserved much of its original structure. Thus, as Casino de la Cultura, it again has a chance to be reused, this time as a cultural center.
It is located at the corner of two primary roads, Alvaro Obregon Avenue and Niños Heroes Street, at the foot of the Old Waterfront of the Tamazula River.


Regional Museum of Sinaloa
Founded as a museum of Culiacán and inaugurated on December 14, 1958, the Regional Museum of Sinaloa is the city's oldest. For half a century, the Regional Museum of Sinaloa has been a space linked with the past, strengthening the regional identity.
The building is located within the Constitution Civic Center complex, which integrates libraries, sports areas, and a zoo. Its style is inscribed within the mainstream of architectural functionalism, with the simplicity and effectiveness of that era.


Museo de Arte de Sinaloa
The Sinaloa Art Museum (MASIN) is one of the most important venues for the exhibition of hundreds of visual arts assemblies in Culiacan: exhibitions of painting, sculpture, photography, drawing, graphics, installation, video and art-object; and is a key forum for performing arts, cultural and academic events, such as concerts, book presentations, conferences, symposia and workshops of various artistic disciplines.
The building that houses it was built in 1837, and in 1890, it was remodelled by architect Luis F. Molina into the Municipal Palace. From 1980, it was used as the headquarters of the municipal police. In 1990, it was renovated to accommodate the museum and opened as such on November 21, 1991.


Parks


Parque Revolución
The park is located in the city center, and it is home to the local basketball team, Caballeros de Culiacán. The park area is currently being remodeled, including the basketball arena.


Centro Cívico Constitución
Established in December 1958, the zoo is a prominent landmark in the city. Despite ongoing economic challenges, it remains a major recreational center in the capital.


Infrastructure


Buildings


Schools
Autonomous University of Sinaloa High School (Central Campus)
Casa Blanca University
COBAES 26 (Gral. Ángel Flores)
COBAES 27 (Culiacán)


External links
(in Spanish) H. Ayuntamiento de Culiacán — Official website
(in Spanish) Culiacán Travel Guide Archived 2006-06-24 at the Wayback Machine - Official website

Dragan Đurić (Serbian Cyrillic: Драган Ђурић; born 20 January 1954) is a Serbian businessman, economist and former president of FK Partizan football club. He is also a president and owner of ZEKSTRA Group.


FK Partizan
On 23 July 2008 he was selected as president of FK Partizan. His predecessor was Tomislav Karadžić.


References
Dragan Đurić

Dry Ridge is a home rule-class city in Grant County, Kentucky, in the United States. As of the 2020 census, Dry Ridge had a population of 2,102. From around 1910 to 1960, the city's economy was dominated by business related to its mineral water wells, purported to have healing properties.


Geography
Dry Ridge is located north of the center of Grant County. It is bordered to the south by the city of Williamstown, the county seat. Interstate 75 passes through Dry Ridge, with access from Exit 159. I-75 leads north 35 miles (56 km) to Cincinnati and south 49 miles (79 km) to Lexington. U.S. Route 25 (Main Street) runs through the center of Dry Ridge, leading north 7 miles (11 km) to Crittenden and south 4 miles (6 km) to the center of Williamstown.
According to the United States Census Bureau, Dry Ridge has a total area of 4.6 square miles (11.8 km2), of which 0.03 square miles (0.09 km2), or 0.72%, is water.


History
The community now known as Dry Ridge was settled about 1792 as "Campbell's Station" near a spring said to have medicinal qualities.
A post office called "Dry Ridge" was established in 1815 at an inn. Dry Ridge takes its name from a ridge surrounded by inns where travelers stopped for water before proceeding.
In 1909, the city was incorporated, the last incorporated in Grant County. That same year, a creamery company found mineral water which was believed to have medical properties. During the early part of the 20th century, Dry Ridge was the home of Kentucky Carlsbad Mineral Water Bottling Company, and home of the Carlsbad Hotel completed in 1911. People came to Dry Ridge from all over the eastern United States to take the mineral water of what was known as the Kentucky Carlsbad Springs, although it was not a spring, but a well. The hotel was destroyed by fire on February 25, 1927.
In 1937, a water distribution system was created with water from Williamstown, Kentucky's lake.


Demographics


2020 census
As of the 2020 census, Dry Ridge had a population of 2,102. The median age was 34.1 years. 28.0% of residents were under the age of 18 and 12.2% of residents were 65 years of age or older. For every 100 females there were 89.4 males, and for every 100 females age 18 and over there were 89.1 males age 18 and over.
0.0% of residents lived in urban areas, while 100.0% lived in rural areas.
There were 815 households in Dry Ridge, of which 36.9% had children under the age of 18 living in them. Of all households, 38.8% were married-couple households, 17.9% were households with a male householder and no spouse or partner present, and 33.6% were households with a female householder and no spouse or partner present. About 29.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.
There were 892 housing units, of which 8.6% were vacant. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.6% and the rental vacancy rate was 4.5%.


2000 census
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,995 people, 771 households, and 535 families residing in the city. The population density was 428.2 inhabitants per square mile (165.3/km2). There were 861 housing units at an average density of 184.8 per square mile (71.4/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 97.19% White, 0.55% African American, 0.10% Native American, 1.30% Asian, 0.20% from other races, and 0.65% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.70% of the population.
There were 771 households, out of which 39.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.4% were married couples living together, 18.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.5% were non-families. 26.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 3.00.
In the city, the population was spread out, with 28.6% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 29.3% from 25 to 44, 18.9% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.0 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $30,647, and the median income for a family was $32,202. Males had a median income of $38,000 versus $23,000 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,568. About 21.0% of families and 23.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 39.0% of those under age 18 and 14.4% of those age 65 or over.


Education
Grant County students are served by Grant County Middle School and Grant County High School, both located in Dry Ridge.


Notable people
Lulu Vere Childers, African-American music educator
Skeeter Davis (Mary Frances Penick, 1931–2004), country-pop (or Nashville sound) singer


Climate
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Dry Ridge has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated "Cfa" on climate maps.


References


External links
City of Dry Ridge official website
Historical Texts and Images of Dry Ridge

Drymaea or Drymaia (Ancient Greek: Δρυμαία) or Drymus or Drymos (Δρύμος) or Drymea or Drymia (Δρυμία) or Drymiae was a frontier town of ancient Phocis, on the side of Doris, whence it is included in the limits of Doris by Livy. Pausanias describes it as 80 stadia from Amphicleia: but this number appears to be an error of the copyists, since in the same passage he says that Amphicleia was only 15 stadia from Tithronium, and Tithronium 15 stadia from Drymaea, which would make Drymaea only 30 stadia from Amphicleia. He also speaks of an ancient temple of Demeter at Drymaea, containing an upright statue of the goddess in stone, in whose honour the annual festival of the Thesmophoria was celebrated. Its more ancient name is said to have been Nauboleis (Ναυβολεῖς), which was derived from Naubolus, an ancient Phocian hero, father of Iphitus.
It was one of the Phocian towns destroyed in the Greco-Persian Wars by the army of Xerxes I in 480 BCE. In 348/7 BCE, it was destroyed in the Third Sacred War and the inhabitants settled in nearby villages. During the First Macedonian War, Philip V of Macedon conquered the town in 208 BCE.
The site of Drymaea is near the modern village of Glunitsa (renamed Drymaia in 1915). William Martin Leake visited the site in the 19th century and noted that is indicated by some ruins, situated midway between Kamares and Glunista, and occupying a rocky point of the mountain on the edge of the plain. "Some of the towers remain nearly entire. The masonry is generally of the third order, but contains some pieces of the polygonal kind; the space enclosed is a triangle, of which none of the sides is more than 250 yards (230 m). At the summit is a circular acropolis of about 2 acres (0.81 ha), preserving the remains of an opening into the town".


References

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1854–1857). "Drymaea". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography. London: John Murray.

Duke of Riánsares (Spanish: Duque de Riánsares) is a hereditary title of Spanish nobility, accompanied by the dignity of Grandee. It was created on 23 June 1844 by Queen Isabella II in favor of Agustín Fernando Muñoz y Sánchez, second husband of the Queen Mother, Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies.


Name
The name refers both to the Riánsares River, which runs near the town of Tarancón in the province of Cuenca, where the grantee was from, and to the Virgin of Riánsares, patron saint of said town of which the Queen Mother was very devoted.


Dukes of Riánsares
Agustín Fernando Muñoz y Sánchez, 1st Duke of Riánsares (1844–1873)
Fernando María Muñoz y Borbón, 2nd Duke of Riánsares (1876–1910)
Fernando Muñoz y Bernaldo de Quirós, 3rd Duke of Riánsares (1911–1913)
Fernando Muñoz y Canga-Argüelles, 4th Duke of Riánsares (1917–1925)
José Bernardo Muñoz y Acebal, 5th Duke of Riánsares (1954–2008)
María de la Consolación Muñoz y Santa Marina, 6th Duchess of Riánsares (since 2009)


Line of succession


References

"E85" is a song by American rapper and singer Don Toliver. It was initially released on January 30, 2026, as the opening track on his fifth studio album, Octane, and was sent to US rhythmic contemporary radio on March 17 as the album's fourth single. It was produced by Travis Scott, Aaron Paris, 206Derek and Jaasu. The song contains a sample of "Chest Pain (I Love)" by Malcolm Todd.


Composition
"E85" is a trap song. It is composed of synthesizers, a string arrangement, and guitar. Don Toliver gives a melodic, crooning performance; lyrically, he fantasizes about a trip with his lover on a desert highway.


Critical reception
The song received generally positive reviews. Michael Saponara of Billboard ranked it as the second best song from Octane, comparing the sampling to Kanye West's musical style and commenting that it "leads to a melodic trap mix that sounds foreign to the ear for listeners, but it's addictive to the point you want more." He added, "His elastic vocals change the song's texture, but his ability to surround all of that chaos with a catchy Dumb & Dumber-referencing chorus is what gives 'E85' a chance to be a hit." Robin Murray of Clash wrote "Crushing opener 'E85' is all thick layers of syrupy synths and bold rhymes, a stadium-worthy introduction." Kayla Torres of Exclaim! considered the song to be one of the strongest moments on Octane, writing that the sample "fully transcends you into Toliver's world, bringing back some of that Hardstone Psycho rock instrumentation, with gritty guitar textures cutting through the haze." Amy Haskour of Pitchfork called the song a contender for 2026 song of the summer, describing it as an "effortless collage of genres".


Music video
Don Toliver performed a medley of the song and "Long Way to Calabasas" on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on January 27, 2026.
The full music video was later released on May 13, 2026, with a cameo appearance by Toliver's girlfriend, Kali Uchis.


Charts


Certifications


References

Eagle Pass (el. 7,464 ft/2,275 m) is a high mountain pass in Lake County, Montana in the United States.
It is called nšt̓ew̓s sx̣ʷcusi in Salish, or "Standing in Middle" because a pillar of rock stands in the middle of the pass.


References


External links
Eagle Pass, Montana Hometown Locator

Earnshaw Cook (March 28, 1900 – November 11, 1987) was an American  early researcher and proponent of sabermetrics, the analysis of baseball through statistical means.


Engineering
Cook was born in Reisterstown, Maryland in 1900. A member of the Princeton University class of 1921, he was an engineer specializing in metallurgy. He spent most of his working life at the American Brake Shoe Co. in Mahwah, New Jersey, later consulting on the Manhattan Project before retiring from the industry in 1945. In the 1950s and 1960s, Cook worked as a mechanical engineering professor at Johns Hopkins University, where he published several academic papers.


Statistical baseball studies
Cook first set about his statistical baseball studies with the goal of proving that Ty Cobb, holder of the highest career batting average at .366, was better than Babe Ruth, the premier power hitter of the first half of the 20th century. Additionally Cook sought to understand strategical issues such as batting order and relief pitching, rather than accept the traditional strategies of baseball. Sports Illustrated writer Frank Deford learned of Cook's work and interviewed him for the lead story of a 1964 issue with the title "Baseball is Played All Wrong".  Using tools of the time, such as a slide rule and a Friden STW mechanical calculator, Earnshaw Cook published the culmination of his work, Percentage Baseball (MIT Press), in 1964. Percentage Baseball was the first book of baseball statistics studies to gain national media attention. Though Cook received some support from Los Angeles Dodgers manager Walter Alston and Chicago White Sox owner Bill Veeck, most baseball executives and managers rejected Cook's mathematical approach and academic language. He was also criticized for lax mathematical models and inadequate numerical evidence by statisticians, such as George Lindsey (himself a baseball statistician), who advised that it be "kept out of the sight of students of the theory of probability." Modern author Michael Lewis describes Cook's prose as "crafted to alienate [baseball statistics] converts."
Among Cook's most bold assertions was that, utilizing his strategies, a team could gain up to 250 runs a season, a number which modern methods indicate is an extreme overestimate. Years later, sabermetrician Pete Palmer and sports historian John Thorn asserted that their computer simulations using Cook's lineup modifications actually slightly reduce the number of runs a team scored. Bill James would later write in his 1981 Baseball Abstract that "Cook knew everything about statistics and nothing at all about baseball—and for that reasons, all of his answers are wrong, all of his methods useless." Earnshaw Cook also dismissed the effects of player handedness (thus, condemning the use of the platoon system), which even contemporary studies pointed out to be erroneous. Cook did, however, uncover several important pieces of information which are now accepted as common knowledge in modern sabermetrics, such as the inefficiency of the sacrifice bunt. More importantly, the material generated discussion on statistical analysis in baseball and introduced many baseball fans to objective research.  In 1971, Waverly Press published Cook's follow-up to Percentage Baseball titled Percentage Baseball and the Computer, in which Cook describes many pieces of strategy his computer simulations suggest.


Influence and legacy

Cook never worked for a Major League baseball team; he described the relationship between himself and baseball franchises in the forward to Percentage Baseball: "I would be willing to go as far as pretending to understand why none of four competent and successful executives of second-division ball clubs were most reluctant to employ probabilistic methods of any description... but they did not even want to hear about them!"  Though Cook himself was never hired by a Major League team, his work influenced Major League Baseball personnel such as Tal Smith, Ewing Kauffman and Davey Johnson, as well as future sabermetricians like Palmer.  Percentage Baseball also influenced Eric Walker, who worked for the San Francisco Giants and Sandy Alderson's Oakland Athletics.  Cook's slide rule, which he used during his research for Percentage Baseball, was donated upon request to the Baseball Hall of Fame. Prior to his death he had diminished eyesight and he and wife Elizabeth Cook collaborated with Johns Hopkins on  engineering  illuminated magnification glasses for reading and research. His signature tie was a bow tie. He engineered a unique golf putter for himself and applied his statistical and rare metal analysis to golf as well. He had experience in the navy during WW1 and his roommate from College Larry Keyes and he  played baseball. Elizabeth Cook experienced college in England. Cook had no direct descendants. Earnshaw Cook died of a heart attack in 1987 in Baltimore, Maryland. Elizabeth Cook passed in 1996.
Philip Roth based the character of the kid genius baseball coach Isaac Ellis in The Great American Novel on Cook.


References

The Eclipse Stakes is a Melbourne Racing Club Group 3 Thoroughbred horse race held under quality handicap conditions, for horses aged three years old and upwards, over a distance of 1800 metres, run at Sandown Racecourse, Melbourne, Australia in mid November.


History
The race was not held for 2 years during World War II. The Melbourne Racing Club moved the race predominantly to Sandown in 1994. However at times the race has been rescheduled and held at Caulfield as was the case in 2013 when Sandown Racecourse was under construction.
When held at Sandown Racecourse, the race has been scheduled on the inner Lakeside racecourse at times.
Since 2021, the race has been run at Caulfield Racecourse.


Grade
1937–1978 - Principal race
1979–1995 - Listed race
1996 onwards  - Group 3


Venue


Distance


1944 racebook


Winners
Source:


See also
List of Australian Group races
Group races


References

Sir Edward Harington, 2nd Baronet of Ridlington (died 1652), English landowner.
Edward Harington was the eldest son of Sir James Harington of Ridlington and Frances Sapcote.
He married Margaret Doyley (c. 1578–1658) in 1601, in a double wedding his father married Margaret's mother Anne Bernard, the widow of John Doyley, heir to the Merton estate in Oxfordshire.
He was twice High Sheriff of Rutland, and succeeded his father as the 2nd Baronet of Ridlington.
At the manor house of Merton there was a long gallery and the 17th-century garden included a terrace to give a view towards Otmoor and the surrounding villages.
He was buried at Swakeleys at Ickenham in 1652, Swakeleys House was inherited by his son from Sir Edmund Wright. The inscription for his tomb says that his body was "translated" there.


Family
Edward and Margaret had 14 children including;

Sir James Harington of Ridlington and Swakeleys, who married Katherine Wright (1617-1675), a daughter of Sir Edmund Wright, Lord Mayor of London, both buried at Merton. They had 16 children. James Harington was appointed to make inventories of the royal houses in 1649.
John Harington.
Ann Harington, married Sir Richard Pigot of Doddershall, Buckinghamshire.
Eliza Harington, married John Hacker of Hintham, Nottinghamshire.
Jane Harington, married Richard Serjeant of Dinton, Buckinghamshire.
Elizabeth Harington, married to Christopher Browne of Tolethorpe, Rutland.
Bridget Harington, married to (1) Richard Ser, (2) Sir John Gore of New Place, Gilston, Hertfordshire (3) Sir Thomas Tyrrell.
Lucy Harington (d. 1660), seventh daughter, was buried at Merton.
Theodosia Harington (1616-1684), the youngest daughter, married John Fountaine.


References

El Hugeirat (also El Hagarat) is a moribund Hill Nubian language spoken in the northern Nuba Mountains of southern Sudan. It is spoken by approximately 50 people in a few families within the El Hugeirat hills, specifically in the villages of Sija, Bija, Shenishen, and Baboy.


References

El Salitre is a town in the municipality of San Martín de Hidalgo in the state of Jalisco, Mexico. It has a population of 2,434 inhabitants.


Climate
Climate is characterized by relatively high temperatures and evenly distributed precipitation throughout the year, leading to very warm nights.  The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "Cfa" (Humid Subtropical Climate).


References


External links
El Salitre at PueblosAmerica.com

Elida ( ee-LY-də) is a village in Allen County, Ohio, United States. The population was 1,923 at the 2020 census. It is included in the Lima, Ohio Metropolitan Statistical Area.


History
Elida was laid out in 1852. A post office called Elida was established in 1854, and remained in operation until 1959. The village was incorporated in 1878.


Geography
According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of 1.22 square miles (3.16 km2), all land.


Demographics


2010 census
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,905 people, 708 households, and 559 families living in the village. The population density was 1,561.5 inhabitants per square mile (602.9/km2). There were 741 housing units at an average density of 607.4 per square mile (234.5/km2). The racial makeup of the village was 94.3% White, 2.6% African American, 0.1% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.7% from other races, and 1.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.6% of the population.
There were 708 households, of which 37.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.0% were married couples living together, 9.0% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.9% had a male householder with no wife present, and 21.0% were non-families. 18.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.04.
The median age in the village was 40.2 years. 26.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 7.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 21.5% were from 25 to 44; 32.7% were from 45 to 64; and 12.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the village was 48.7% male and 51.3% female.


2000 census
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,917 people, 698 households, and 552 families living in the village. The population density was 1,852.1 inhabitants per square mile (715.1/km2). There were 717 housing units at an average density of 692.7 per square mile (267.5/km2). The racial makeup of the village was 95.72% White, 1.93% African American, 0.57% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.73% from other races, and 0.99% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.46% of the population.
There were 698 households, out of which 41.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 67.6% were married couples living together, 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.8% were non-families. 18.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.75 and the average family size was 3.15.
In the village, the population was spread out, with 30.2% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 23.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.2 males.
The median income for a household in the village was $49,293, and the median income for a family was $58,750. Males had a median income of $41,895 versus $26,635 for females. The per capita income for the village was $20,573. About 3.1% of families and 3.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.4% of those under age 18 and 2.4% of those age 65 or over.


Education
Elida is home to the Elida Local School District, and has a public library, a branch of the Lima Public Library.


Notable people
Floyd Gahman, landscape artist
Zachary Green, WWE Nash Carter
Dakota Mathias, NBA basketball player


References


External links
Official website

The Embassy of Singapore, Washington, D.C. is Singapore's main diplomatic mission to the United States. It is located at 3501 International Place Northwest, Washington, D.C.
The embassy also operates consulates-general in San Francisco, New York City, and honorary consulates-general in Miami and Chicago.
The incumbent ambassador since May 2023 is Lui Tuck Yew.


See also
Singapore–United States relations
Singapore Ambassador to the United States


References


External links

Official site

Emil Anka (born 20 January 1969) is a Hungarian Chess Grandmaster. He moved to the United States in 2010, and lives in Kirkland, Washington. He also teaches chess and runs local chess tournaments.


References

An emoticon (, ə-MOH-tə-kon, rarely , ih-MOTT-ih-kon; portmanteau of emotion and icon) is a pictorial representation of a facial expression using characters—usually punctuation marks, numbers and letters—to express a person's feelings, mood or reaction, without needing to describe it in detail.
ASCII emoticons can be traced back hundreds of years with various one-off uses. The protocol as a way to use them to communicate emotion in conversations is credited to computer scientist Scott Fahlman, who proposed what came to be known as "smileys"—:-) and :-(—in a message on the bulletin board system (BBS) of Carnegie Mellon University in 1982. In Western countries, emoticons are usually written at a right angle to the direction of the text. Users from Japan popularized a kind of emoticon called kaomoji, using Japanese's larger character sets. This style arose on ASCII NET of Japan in 1986. They are also known as verticons (from vertical emoticon) due to their readability without rotations. This is often seen as the 1st generation of emoticons.
The second generation began when computing became more common in the west, and people began replacing the previous ASCII art with actual emoticon icons or designs. One term used to define these types of emoticons compared to ASCII was portrait emoticons, as portrait emoticons are meant to resemble a face from the front like a portrait painting. The use of these emoticons became prevalent when SMS mobile text messaging and the Internet became widespread in the late 1990s, emoticons became increasingly popular and were commonly used in texting, Internet forums and emails. Over time, the designs became more elaborate and emoticons such as 🙂 by Unicode became commonly referred to as Emoticons. They have played a significant role in communication as technology for communication purposes advanced and increased in use. Emoticons today convey non-verbal cues of language, such as facial expressions but also hand gestures, with The Smiley Company stating in interviews that emoticons now allow for greater emotional understanding in writing when emoticons are used. Emoticons were the precursors to modern emojis not just for facial expressions, but also replacing categories like weather, sports and animals.


History


ASCII art and faces (pre-1981)

The use of typographic symbols to represent facial expression can be observed as early as Purgatorio, where Dante Alighieri employs the word "omo" as a preemoticon representation of the human face. The two letters "o" signify sunken eyes, while the letter "m" forms the angular outlines of the eyelids, nose, and cheeks, depicting an emaciated face marked by hunger and thirst.Their sockets were like rings without the gems;Whoever in the face of men reads 'omo'Might well in these have recognised the 'm.'
In 1648, poet Robert Herrick wrote, "Tumble me down, and I will sit Upon my ruins, (smiling yet:)." Herrick's work predated any other recorded use of brackets as a smiling face by around 200 years. However, experts doubted the inclusion of the colon in the poem was deliberate and if it was meant to represent a smiling face. English professor Alan Jacobs argued that "punctuation, in general, was unsettled in the seventeenth century ... Herrick was unlikely to have consistent punctuational practices himself, and even if he did he couldn't expect either his printers or his readers to share them." 17th century typography practice often placed colons and semicolons within parentheses, including 14 instances of ":)" in Richard Baxter's 1653 Plain Scripture Proof of Infants Church-membership and Baptism.
Precursors to modern emoticons have existed since the 19th century. The National Telegraphic Review and Operators Guide in April 1857 documented the use of the number 73 in Morse code to express "love and kisses" (later reduced to the more formal "best regards"). Dodge's Manual in 1908 documented the reintroduction of "love and kisses" as the number 88. New Zealand academics Joan Gajadhar and John Green comment that both Morse code abbreviations are more succinct than modern abbreviations such as LOL.

The transcript of one of Abraham Lincoln's speeches in 1862 recorded the audience's reaction as: "(applause and laughter ;)". There has been some debate whether the glyph in Lincoln's speech was a typo, a legitimate punctuation construct or the first emoticon. Linguist Philip Seargeant argues that it was a simple typesetting error.

Before March 1881, the examples of "typographical art" appeared in at least three newspaper articles, including Kurjer warszawski (published in Warsaw) from March 5, 1881, using punctuation to represent the emotions of joy, melancholy, indifference and astonishment.

In a 1912 essay titled "For Brevity and Clarity", American author Ambrose Bierce suggested facetiously that a bracket could be used to represent a smiling face, proposing "an improvement in punctuation" with which writers could convey cachinnation, loud or immoderate laughter: "it is written thus ‿ and presents a smiling mouth. It is to be appended, with the full stop, to every jocular or ironical sentence". In a 1936 Harvard Lampoon article, writer Alan Gregg proposed combining brackets with various other punctuation marks to represent various moods. Brackets were used for the sides of the mouth or cheeks, with other punctuation used between the brackets to display various emotions: (-) for a smile, (--) (showing more "teeth") for laughter, (#) for a frown and (*) for a wink. An instance of text characters representing a sideways smiling and frowning face could be found in the New York Herald Tribune on March 10, 1953, promoting the film Lili starring Leslie Caron.
The September 1962 issue of MAD magazine included an article titled "Typewri-toons". The piece, featuring typewriter-generated artwork credited to "Royal Portable", was entirely made up of repurposed typography, including a capital letter P having a bigger 'bust' than a capital I, a lowercase b and d discussing their pregnancies, an asterisk on top of a letter to indicate the letter had just come inside from snowfall, and a classroom of lowercase n's interrupted by a lowercase h "raising its hand". A further example attributed to a Baltimore Sunday Sun columnist appeared in a 1967 article in Reader's Digest, using a dash and right bracket to represent a tongue in one's cheek: —). Prefiguring the modern "smiley" emoticon, writer Vladimir Nabokov told an interviewer from The New York Times in 1969, "I often think there should exist a special typographical sign for a smile—some sort of concave mark, a supine round bracket, which I would now like to trace in reply to your question."
In the 1970s, the PLATO IV computer system was launched. It was one of the first computers used throughout educational and professional institutions, but rarely used in a residential setting. On the computer system, a student at the University of Illinois developed pictograms that resembled different smiling faces. Mary Kalantzis and Bill Cope stated this likely took place in 1972, and they claimed these to be the first emoticons.


ASCII emoticons - First generation (1982–mid-1990s)
In 1982, Carnegie Mellon computer scientist Scott Fahlman is generally credited with the protocol of communicating and portraying emotion in written text. The use of ASCII symbols, a standard set of codes representing typographical marks, was essential to allow the symbols to be displayed on any computer. In Carnegie Mellon's bulletin board system, Fahlman proposed colon–hyphen–right bracket :-) as a label for "attempted humor" to try to solve the difficulty of conveying humor or sarcasm in plain text. Fahlman sent the following message after an incident where a humorous warning about a mercury spill in an elevator was misunderstood as serious:

19-Sep-82 11:44    Scott E  Fahlman             :-)
From: Scott E  Fahlman <Fahlman at Cmu-20c>
 
I propose that the following character sequence for joke markers:
        
:-)
        
Read it sideways.  Actually, it is probably more economical to mark
things that are NOT jokes, given current trends.  For this, use
        
:-(

Within a few months, the smiley had spread to the ARPANET and Usenet. Other suggestions on the forum included an asterisk * and an ampersand &, the latter meant to represent a person doubled over in laughter, as well as a percent sign % and a pound sign #. Scott Fahlman suggested that not only could his emoticon communicate emotion, but also replace language. Since the 1990s, emoticons (colon, hyphen and bracket) have become integral to digital communications, and have inspired a variety of other emoticons, including the "winking" face using a semicolon ;-), XD, a representation of the Face with Tears of Joy emoji and the acronym "LOL".
In 1996, The Smiley Company was established by Nicolas Loufrani and his father Franklin as a way of commercializing the smiley trademark. As part of this, The Smiley Dictionary website was launched and had a focus on ASCII emoticons, where available emoticons were catalogued. In total more than 500 were recorded. Notably this catalog removed the dash ( - ) for a nose and just had eyes and a mouth. The reasoning behind this was to make the ASCII emoticons more like the smiley, which resulted in :) instead of :-). The shortening or redesign of ASCII emoticons has not been covered in enough depth to know where the shorter versions originated, but The Smiley Dictionary could have as a minimum influenced the way ASCII emoticons are used today. Many other people did similar to Loufrani from 1995 onwards, including David Sanderson creating the book Smileys in 1997. James Marshall also hosted an online collection of ASCII emoticons that he completed in 2008. In 1998, the book Le Dico Smiley was also published.
A researcher at Stanford University surveyed the emoticons used in four million Twitter messages and found that the smiling emoticon without a hyphen "nose" :) was much more common than the original version with the hyphen :-). Linguist Vyvyan Evans argues that this represents a shift in usage by younger users as a form of covert prestige: rejecting a standard usage in order to demonstrate in-group membership.


Portrait emoticons - Second generation (1990s–present)
Nicolas Loufrani began to use the basic text designs and turned them into graphical representations, which are now known as portrait emoticons. His designs were registered at the United States Copyright Office in 1997 and appeared online as GIF files in 1998. For ASCII emoticons that did not exist to convert into graphical form, Loufrani also backward engineered new ASCII emoticons from the graphical versions he created. These were the first graphical representations of ASCII emoticons. Not only did these portrait emoticons portray existing and new ASCII emoticons, but also new features were added, such as hand gestures in the form of white gloves. These have since become standalone emojis along with other emojis that have replaced words in text communication. In 2001, he published his emoticon set online on the Smiley Dictionary. This dictionary included 640 different smiley icons and was published as a book called Dico Smileys in 2002. In 2017, British magazine The Drum referred to Loufrani as the "godfather of the emoji" for his work in the field.
The first American company to take notice of emojis was Google beginning in 2007. In August 2007, a team made up of Mark Davis and his colleagues Kat Momoi and Markus Scherer began petitioning the Unicode Technical Committee (UTC) in an attempt to standardise the emoji. The UTC, having previously deemed emoji to be out of scope for Unicode, made the decision to broaden its scope to enable compatibility with the Japanese cellular carrier formats which were becoming more widespread. Peter Edberg and Yasuo Kida joined the collaborative effort from Apple Inc. shortly after, and their official UTC proposal came in January 2009 with 625 new emoji characters. Notably the move included a large set of emoticons, designed in an emoji-style but representing different emotions.
In recent times, emoticons, emojis and smileys have often become intertwined and confused. Emojis represent the largest set of graphical communication, but they often include portrait emoticons. In fact, the majority of the most commonly used Emoji are emoticons (because they represent an emotion). In 2024, the BBC reported that 2 of the top 3 emojis were portrait emoticons.
On September 23, 2021, it was announced that Scott Fahlman was holding an auction for the original emoticons he created in 1982. The auction was held in Dallas, United States, and sold the two designs as non-fungible tokens (NFT). The online auction ended later that month, with the originals selling for US$237,500. A year later in 2022, The Smiley Company auctioned off an NFT of 42 original graphical emoticon on World Emoji Day. The proceeds of the sale went to the company's non-profit arm, Smiley Movement.
In some programming languages, certain operators are known informally by their emoticon-like appearance. This includes the Spaceship operator <=> (a comparison), the Diamond operator <> (for type hinting) and the Elvis operator ?: (a shortened ternary operator).


Styles


Western
Usually, emoticons in Western style have the eyes on the left, followed by the nose and the mouth. It is commonly placed at the end of a sentence, replacing the full stop. The two-character version :), which omits the nose, is very popular. The most basic emoticons are relatively consistent in form, but some can be rotated (making them tiny ambigrams). There are also some variations to emoticons to get new definitions, like changing a character to express another feeling. For example, :( indicates sadness and :(( indicates a more extreme sadness. Weeping can be written as :'(. A blush can be expressed as :">. Others include wink ;), a grin :D, :P for tongue out, and smug :->; they can be used to denote a flirting or joking tone, or may be implying a second meaning in the sentence preceding it. ;P, such as when blowing a raspberry. An often used combination is also <3 for a heart and </3 for a broken heart. :O is also sometimes used to depict shock. :/ is used to depict melancholy, disappointment or disapproval. :| may be used to depict a neutral face.
A broad grin is sometimes shown with crinkled eyes to express further amusement; XD and the addition of further "D" letters can suggest laughter or extreme amusement, e.g., XDDDD. The "3" in X3 and :3 represents a cat's mouth.  An equal sign is often used for the eyes in place of the colon, seen as =). It has become more acceptable to omit the hyphen, whether a colon or an equal sign is used for the eyes. One linguistic study has indicated that the use of a nose in an emoticon may be related to the user's age, with younger people less likely to use a nose.
Some variants are also more common in certain countries due to keyboard layouts. For example, the smiley =) may occur in Scandinavia. Diacritical marks are sometimes used. The letters Ö and Ü can be seen as emoticons, as the upright versions of :O (meaning that one is surprised) and :D (meaning that one is very happy), respectively. In countries where the Cyrillic alphabet is used, the right parenthesis ) is used as a smiley. Multiple parentheses )))) are used to express greater happiness, amusement or laughter. The colon is omitted due to being in a lesser-known position on the ЙЦУКЕН keyboard layout. The 'shrug' emoticon, ¯\_(ツ)_/¯, uses the glyph ツ from the Japanese katakana writing system.


Kaomoji (Japan ASCII movement)

Kaomoji are often seen as the Japanese development of emoticons that is separate to the Scott Fahlman movement, which started in 1982. In 1986, a designer began to use brackets and other ASCII text characters to form faces. Over time, they became more often differentiated from each other, although both use ASCII characters. However, more westernised Kaomojis have dropped the brackets, such as owo, uwu and TwT, popularised in internet subcultures such as the anime and furry communities.


2channel
Users of the Japanese discussion board 2channel, in particular, have developed a variety emoticons using characters from various scripts, such as Kannada, as in ಠ_ಠ (for a look of disapproval, disbelief or confusion). Similarly, the letter ರೃ was used in emoticons to represent a monocle and ಥ to represent a tearing eye. They were picked up by 4chan and spread to other Western sites soon after. Some have become characters in their own right like Monā.


Korean
In South Korea, emoticons use Korean Hangul letters, and the Western style is rarely used. The structures of Korean and Japanese emoticons are somewhat similar, but they have some differences. Korean style contains Korean jamo (letters) instead of other characters.
The consonant jamos ㅅ, ㅁ or ㅂ can be used as the mouth or nose component and ㅇ, ㅎ or ㅍ for the eyes. Using quotation marks " and apostrophes ' are also commonly used combinations. Vowel jamos such as ㅜ and ㅠ can depict a crying face. Example: ㅜㅜ, (same function as T in Western style). Sometimes ㅡ (not an em-dash "—", but a vowel jamo), a comma (,) or an underscore (_) is added, and the two character sets can be mixed together, as in ㅠ.ㅡ, ㅡ^ㅜ and ㅜㅇㅡ. Also, semicolons and carets are commonly used in Korean emoticons; semicolons can mean sweating, examples of it are -;/, --^ and  -_-;;.


Chinese ideographic

The character 囧 (U+56E7), which means 'patterned window', may be combined with the posture emoticon Orz, such as 囧rz. The character existed in Oracle bone script but was rarely used until its use as an emoticon, documented as early as January 20, 2005.
Other variants of 囧 include 崮 (king 囧), 莔 (queen 囧), 商 (囧 with a hat), 囧興 (turtle) and 卣 (Bomberman). The character 槑 (U+69D1), a variant of 梅 'plum', is used to represent a double of 呆 'dull' or further magnitude of dullness. In Chinese, normally full characters (as opposed to the stylistic use of 槑) might be duplicated to express emphasis.


Posture emoticons


Orz

Orz (other forms include: Or2, on_, OTZ, OTL, STO, JTO, _no, _冂○ and 囧​rz) is an emoticon representing a kneeling or bowing person (the Japanese version of which is called dogeza), with the "o" being the head, the "r" being the arms and part of the body, and the "z" being part of the body and the legs. This stick figure can represent respect or kowtowing, but commonly appears along a range of responses, including "frustration, despair, sarcasm, or grudging respect".
It was first used in late 2002 at the forum on Techside, a Japanese personal website. At the "Techside FAQ Forum" (TECHSIDE教えて君BBS(教えてBBS)), a poster asked about a cable cover, typing "_|￣|○" to show a cable and its cover. Others commented that it looked like a kneeling person, and the symbol became popular. These comments were soon deleted as they were considered off-topic. By 2005, Orz spawned a subculture: blogs have been devoted to the emoticon, and URL shortening services have been named after it. In Taiwan, Orz is associated with the concept of nice guys.


o7
o7, or O7, is an emoticon that depicts a person saluting, with the o being the head and the 7 being its arm.


Multimedia variations
A portmanteau of emotion and sound, an emotisound is a brief sound transmitted and played back during the viewing of a message, typically an IM message or email message. The sound is intended to communicate an emotional subtext. Some services, such as MuzIcons, combine emoticons and music players in an Adobe Flash-based widget. In 2004, the Trillian chat application introduced a feature called "emotiblips", which allows Trillian users to stream files to their instant message recipients "as the voice and video equivalent of an emoticon".
In 2007, MTV and Paramount Home Entertainment promoted the "emoticlip" as a form of viral marketing for the second season of the show The Hills. The emoticlips were twelve short snippets of dialogue from the show, uploaded to YouTube. The emoticlip concept is credited to the Bradley & Montgomery advertising firm, which wrote that they hoped it would be widely adopted as "greeting cards that just happen to be selling something".


Intellectual property rights

In 2000, Despair, Inc. obtained a U.S. trademark registration for the "frowny" emoticon :-( when used on "greeting cards, posters and art prints". In 2001, they issued a satirical press release, announcing that they would sue Internet users who typed the frowny; the company received protests when its mock release was posted on technology news website Slashdot.
A number of patent applications have been filed on inventions that assist in communicating with emoticons. A few of these have been issued as US patents. US 6987991, for example, discloses a method developed in 2001 to send emoticons over a cell phone using a drop-down menu. The stated advantage was that it eases entering emoticons.
The emoticon :-) was also filed in 2006 and registered in 2008 as a European Community Trademark (CTM). In Finland, the Supreme Administrative Court ruled in 2012 that the emoticon cannot be trademarked, thus repealing a 2006 administrative decision trademarking the emoticons :-), =), =(, :) and :(. In 2005, a Russian court rejected a legal claim against Siemens by a man who claimed to hold a trademark on the ;-) emoticon. In 2008, Russian entrepreneur Oleg Teterin claimed to have been granted the trademark on the ;-) emoticon. A license would not "cost that much—tens of thousands of dollars" for companies but would be free of charge for individuals.


Unicode

A different, but related, use of the term "emoticon" is found in the Unicode Standard, referring to a subset of emoji that display facial expressions. The standard explains this usage with reference to existing systems, which provided functionality for substituting certain textual emoticons with images or emoji of the expressions in question.
Some smiley faces were present in Unicode since 1.1, including a white frowning face, a white smiling face and a black smiling face ("black" refers to a glyph which is filled, "white" refers to a glyph which is unfilled).

The Emoticons block was introduced in Unicode Standard version 6.0 (published in October 2010) and extended by 7.0. It covers Unicode range from U+1F600 to U+1F64F fully.

After that block had been filled, Unicode 8.0 (2015), 9.0 (2016) and 10.0 (2017) added additional emoticons in the range from U+1F910 to U+1F9FF. Currently, U+1F90C – U+1F90F, U+1F93F, U+1F94D – U+1F94F, U+1F96C – U+1F97F, U+1F998 – U+1F9CF (excluding U+1F9C0 which contains the 🧀 emoji) and U+1F9E7 – U+1F9FF do not contain any emoticons since Unicode 10.0.

For historic and compatibility reasons, some other heads and figures, which mostly represent different aspects like genders, activities, and professions instead of emotions, are also found in Miscellaneous Symbols and Pictographs (especially U+1F466 – U+1F487) and Transport and Map Symbols. Body parts, mostly hands, are also encoded in the Dingbat and Miscellaneous Symbols blocks.


See also


Explanatory notes


References


Further reading
Asteroff, Janet (1988) [1987]. "Appendix C: Face Symbols and ASCII Character Set". Paralanguage in Electronic Mail: A Case Study (PhD thesis). New York: Columbia University Teachers College. pp. 221–228. OCLC 757048921. 8721076 – via University Microfilms International.
Bódi, Zoltán, and Veszelszki, Ágnes (2006). Emotikonok. Érzelemkifejezés az internetes kommunikációban (Emoticons: Expressing Emotions in the Internet Communication). Budapest: Magyar Szemiotikai Társaság.
Churches, Owen; Nicholls, Mike; Thiessen, Myra; Kohler, Mark; Keage, Hannah (January 6, 2014) [2013-07-17, 2013-12-05]. "Emoticons in mind: An event-related potential study". Social Neuroscience. 9 (2): 196–202. doi:10.1080/17470919.2013.873737. PMID 24387045.
Dresner, Eli, and Herring, Susan C. (2010). "Functions of the Non-verbal in CMC: Emoticons and Illocutionary Force" Archived October 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine (preprint copy). Communication Theory 20: 249–268.
Edwards, Benj (November 20, 2025). "In 1982, a physics joke gone wrong sparked the invention of the emoticon". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 20, 2025.
Savage, Jon (February 21, 2009). "A Design for Life". Design. The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 29, 2024. Retrieved March 30, 2024.
Veszelszki, Ágnes (2012). Connections of Image and Text in Digital and Handwritten Documents. In: Benedek, András, and Nyíri, Kristóf (eds.): The Iconic Turn in Education. Series Visual Learning Vol. 2. Frankfurt am Main et al.: Peter Lang, pp. 97−110.
Veszelszki, Ágnes (2015). "Emoticons vs. Reaction-Gifs: Non-Verbal Communication on the Internet from the Aspects of Visuality, Verbality and Time". In: Benedek, András; Nyíri, Kristóf (eds.): Beyond Words: Pictures, Parables, Paradoxes (series Visual Learning, vol. 5). Frankfurt: Peter Lang. 131–145.
Walther, J. B.; D'Addario, K. P. (2001). "The impacts of emoticons on message interpretation in computer-mediated communication". Social Science Computer Review. 19 (3): 323–345. doi:10.1177/089443930101900307. ISSN 0894-4393. S2CID 16179750.
Wolf, Alecia (October 2000). "Emotional Expression Online: Gender Differences in Emoticon Use". CyberPsychology & Behavior 3(5): 827–833. doi:10.1089/109493100501918 (subscription required); doi:10.1089/10949310050191809..


External links
 Media related to Emoticon (category) at Wikimedia Commons

The Episcopal Diocese of Eau Claire was a diocese of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America encompassing the northwestern third of Wisconsin. It was part of Province 5 (the upper Midwest). The diocese comprised 20 interdependent congregations, mostly small and rural. The see and diocesan offices were in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, with  Christ Church Cathedral as the mother church. Christ Church in La Crosse was the largest church in the diocese.
In 2024, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church approved the reunion of the dioceses of Eau Claire, Milwaukee, and Fond du Lac into the new Episcopal Diocese of Wisconsin.


History
The roots of the Diocese of Eau Claire began in 1822 when the Oneida Indians, removing from New York state, settled near Green Bay. The first annual council of the Diocese of Wisconsin met in Milwaukee in 1847. In 1874, the General Convention of the Episcopal Church erected the Diocese of Fond du Lac from the Fond du Lac Deanery of the Diocese of Wisconsin. The remaining counties continued as the Diocese of Wisconsin until 1888, when it was renamed the Diocese of Milwaukee. Growth, time, and distance led to the erection of a third Wisconsin diocese. The Diocese of Eau Claire was created from counties of both the Diocese of Milwaukee and Diocese of Fond du Lac in 1928.
On October 22, 2011, the Diocese of Fond du Lac and the Diocese of Eau Claire voted to "junction" into one diocese. However, Russell Jacobus, Bishop of Fond du Lac, withheld consent because of the closeness and irregularities of the vote.
In 2021 it was announced that the diocese of Eau Claire, Fond du Lac, and Milwaukee would contemplate entering an agreement of greater collaboration. With around 1,200 baptized members and most congregations having fewer than 80 members, Eau Claire is one of the Episcopal Church's smallest dioceses and the sustainability of its continued existence has been questioned. In October 2021 it was announced that the three diocese would be actively pursuing reuniting as one diocese in Wisconsin. On May 4, 2024, the three dioceses voted to approve reunion as the Diocese of Wisconsin. The merger agreement received approval at General Convention in June 2024. 


Bishops
On August 28, 2010, a special convention in the diocese elected Edwin M. Leidel, Jr. to be the bishop provisional. The diocese had been without a bishop since April 2008.
On May 1, 2012 the diocesan bishop search committee announced it was accepting applications for the sixth Bishop of the Diocese of Eau Claire.
On November 10, 2012, William Jay Lambert III was elected as the next bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Eau Claire.
On March 16, 2013, Katharine Jefferts Schori presided over the consecration of William Jay Lambert III at Christ Church Cathedral, Eau Claire, Wisconsin, as the Sixth Bishop of the diocese. After Lambert's retirement on December 1, 2020, Matthew Alan Gunter served as bishop provisional.
Bishops who served the Diocese of Wisconsin:

Jackson Kemper (1847–1870)
William Edmond Armitage (1870–1873)
Edward Randolph Welles (1874–1888)
Bishops who served the Diocese of Milwaukee, prior to creation of the Diocese of Eau Claire:

Cyrus Frederick Knight (1889-1891)
Isaac Lea Nicholson (1891-1906)
William Walter Webb (1906-1933)
Bishops who served the Diocese of Eau Claire:

Frank Elmer Wilson, First Bishop of Eau Claire, (1929-1944)
William Wallace Horstick, Second Bishop of Eau Claire, (June 29, 1944 - Resigned Dec 31, 1969)
Stanley Hamilton Atkins, Third Bishop of Eau Claire, (1970-1980)
William C. Wantland, Fourth Bishop of Eau Claire, (1980-1999)
Keith B. Whitmore, Fifth Bishop of Eau Claire, (1999-2008)* Edwin M. Leidel, Jr., Bishop Provisional of Eau Claire, (2010-2013)
William Jay Lambert III, Sixth Bishop (elected November 10, 2012, consecrated March 16, 2013 - December 1, 2020)*Matthew A. Gunter (2020-2024, provisional)


Notes


External links
Official website, archived 2015-2026
Diocese of Wisconsin

Ernest Cole (20 March 1875 – 24 September 1965) was a New Zealand cricketer. He played one first-class match for Taranaki in 1896/97.


See also
List of Taranaki representative cricketers


References


External links
Ernest Cole at Cricinfo

Ernesto del Castillo Ontiveros (21 November 1929 – 3 January 2019) was a Mexican equestrian. He competed in two events at the 1968 Summer Olympics.


References


External links
Ernesto del Castillo at Olympedia

Espedito Chionna (born 29 August 1969) is an Italian former professional footballer who played as a defender.


Career
Chionna stood out in his career, especially defending the teams Molfetta in Serie C2, Pescara in Serie B and Palermo, where he was champion of Serie C1 in the 2000–01 season. He ended his career playing for Casarano.
As a coach, he had brief experience leading his city's team, Latiano, and Boys Mesagne in the Prima Categoria.


Honours
Palermo

Serie C1: 2000–01 (group B)


References

The Estonia women's national under-20 basketball team is a national basketball team of Estonia, administered by the Estonian Basketball Association. It represents the country in women's international under-20 basketball competitions.


FIBA U20 Women's European Championship participations


See also
Estonia women's national basketball team
Estonia women's national under-18 basketball team
Estonia men's national under-20 basketball team


References


External links
Archived records of Estonia team participations

Etayoa is an ungulate of the family Carodniidae in the order Xenungulata that lived during the Early Eocene (~ 55 Ma) in northern South America.


Etymology
The genus of the type species Etayoa bacatensis was named by palaeontologist Carlos Villarroel after Fernando Etayo Serna, who contributed extensively to the paleontology and stratigraphy research in Colombia. The species epithet bacatensis refers to Bacatá, the name in Muysccubun for the main settlement of the southern Muisca Confederation; the name of which has been used for the current Colombian capital Bogotá, founded in a different location than the original Bacatá.


Description
The type species fossil specimen consists of a partial mandible with teeth, found in the Bogotá Formation in the locality Ciudad Bolívar of Bogotá, Colombia. The estimated size of the ungulate is the size of a dog.


Paleoclimate and environment

The finds of iguanians, including the fossil record of hoplocercines, and boine, caenophidian, and ungaliophiine snakes in the Bogotá Formation indicate a tropical forest environment, present just before the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum (EECO). The abundant paleosols of the Bogotá Formation show an increase in chemical weathering across the Paleocene-Eocene (P-E) transition; the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum.


References


Bibliography
Head, Jason J.; Bloch, Jonathan Ivan; Rincón, Aldo F.; Moreno Bernal, Jorge W. (2012), "Paleogene Squamates from the Northern neotropics: Ecological Implications and Biogeographic Histories (Abstract)", Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 72nd Annual Meeting of the Society of vertebrate Paleontology, At Raleigh, North Carolina: _, retrieved 2017-03-29
Morón, Sara; Fox, David L.; Feinberg, Joshua M.; Jaramillo, Carlos; Bayona, Germán; Montes, Camilo; Bloch, Jonathan Ivan (2013), "Climate change during the Early Paleogene in the Bogotá Basin (Colombia) inferred from paleosol carbon isotope stratigraphy, major oxides, and environmental magnetism (Abstract)", Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 388: 115–127, doi:10.1016/j.palaeo.2013.08.010, retrieved 2017-03-29
Villarroel A., Carlos (1987), "Características y afinadas de Etayoa n. gen., tipo de una nueva familia de Xenungulata (Mammalia) del Paleoceno Medio (?) de Colombia" (PDF), Comunicaciones Paleontológicas del Museo de Historia Natural de Montevideo, 19: 241–254, retrieved 2017-03-29


Further reading
Bloch, Jonathan Ivan; Cadena, Edwin; Hastings, Alexander; Rincón, Aldo F.; Jaramillo, Carlos (2008), "Vertebrate faunas from the Paleocene Bogotá Formation of northern Colombia (Abstract)", Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, 68th Annual Meeting: _, retrieved 2017-03-29
Head, Jason J.; Bloch, Jonathan Ivan; Rincón, Aldo F.; Bourque, Jason R.; Jaramillo, Carlos (2011), "An enigmatic derived snake from the earliest Eocene of equatorial South America (Abstract)", Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, 71st Annual Meeting, Las Vegas, NV: _, retrieved 2017-03-29
Herrera, Fabiany; Manchester, Steven R.; Carvalho, Mónica R.; Jaramillo, Carlos; Wings, Scott L. (2014), "Paleocene wind-dispersed fruits and seeds from Colombia and their implications for early Neotropical rainforests" (PDF), Acta Paleobotanica, 54 (2): 197–229, doi:10.2478/acpa-2014-0008, retrieved 2017-03-29
Woodburne, Michael O.; Goin, Francisco J.; Bond, Mariano; Carlini, Alfredo A.; Gelfo, Javier N.; López, Guillermo M.; Iglesias, A.; Zimicz, Ana N. (2014), "Paleogene Land Mammal Faunas of South America; a Response to Global Climatic Changes and Indigenous Floral Diversity" (PDF), Journal of Mammalian Evolution, 21: 1–73, doi:10.1007/s10914-012-9222-1, archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-03-30, retrieved 2017-03-29

Ethel Quayle is British clinical psychologist (but is no longer in practice). She is Personal Chair of Forensic Clinical Psychology at the University of Edinburgh. She researches sexual crimes against children, particularly sexual offenses involving the internet.


Biography
Quayle has worked with both sexual offenders and their victims. She has spent 20 years researching crimes against children involving technology. Her work has involved creating a therapeutic treatment program for internet sexual offenders and an online self-help program for sexual offenders.
Her research has helped influence global policy to deter internet sexual offending. She has collaborated with governmental and non-governmental organizations.


Works
Terrorist Lives       with Maxwell Taylor. Brassey's, 1995.
Child Pornography: An Internet Crime with Max Taylor. 2003.
Viewing child pornography on the Internet: Understanding the offence, managing the offender, helping the victims. Russell House Publishing, 2005.
Only pictures?: Therapeutic work with internet sex offenders.  Russell House Publishing, 2006.
Understanding and Preventing Online Sexual Exploitation of Children. Routledge, 2012.


References


External links
Ethel Quayle publications indexed by Google Scholar

Jeanne Marie Eugénie de Santa Coloma Sourget (née de Santa Coloma; 8 February 1827 - 11 June 1895) was a French composer, pianist, and singer who composed an opera and sang at the Paris Opera.
Santa Coloma was born in Bordeaux to Marie Virgine Gazagne Bouguette and Eugenio Maria de Santa Coloma Lezica. Her father was the Consul of Chile and Consul General of Argentina in France.
Santa Coloma showed early musical ability and began piano lessons at age 5 after she heard a song on the street and reproduced it perfectly on her family's piano at home. She studied music with Arregui (not further identified), Henri Bertini, Charles Louis Colin (the father of French composer Charles Colin), Mme. Dufresne (not further identified), and Pierre-Joseph-Guillaume Zimmerman. She also studied orchestration with Costard de Mézeray. After hearing her sing in Paris, opera composer Fromental Halévy offered to write a role for her to sing. She debuted at the Paris Opera in 1847 and married M. Sourget in 1849. Louise Bertin and Paul Lacome dedicated songs to her.
In her will, Santa Coloma left a bequest of 5,000 francs to the Paris Conservatory. The interest was to be awarded each year to the male or female student who received first prize in singing, piano and composition. It was awarded to the following individuals:

1897 Mr. Hans (singer)
1898 M. L. Levy (piano)
1899 Mr. Ganave (unspecified)
1900 M. Cesbron (singing).
Santa Coloma's music was published by E. Gerard et Cie, Escudier Freres, and Joseph Meissonnier. Her compositions included:


Works


Chamber
String Trio


Opera
L'image


Piano
pieces


Vocal
"A une jeune fille" (text by Victor Hugo)
"C'est ton nom"
"Chant du crepuscule" (text by Victor Hugo)
"Chant Madeleine"
"La Cigale et la fourmi" (text by Jean de la Fontaine)
"Une Etoile"


References

The European Assembly (Pay and Pensions) Act 1979 (c. 50) since 1986 named the European Parliament (Pay and Pensions) Act 1979  is an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom which made provision for the payment of salaries and pensions, and the provision of allowances and facilities, to or in respect of Representatives to the Assembly of the European Communities (now known as MEPs). It was given royal assent on 26 July 1979


See also
Member of the European Parliament
European Parliament
European Communities
Acts of Parliament of the United Kingdom relating to the European Communities and the European Union


Notes


References


External links
Text of the European Assembly (Pay and Pensions) Act 1979 as in force today (including any amendments) within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk.
Text of the European Assembly (Pay and Pensions) Act 1979 as originally enacted or made within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk.

The European Union Anti-Corruption Initiative, EUACI, is the largest program of technical assistance in fighting corruption in Ukraine implemented by the European Union.
The program was established in June 2017 and was expected to run for three years (2017–2019). It was mainly funded by the European Commission and co-funded by Danish International Development Agency. In 2021, the European Court of Auditors found the EU support for reforms in Ukraine to be ineffective in fighting grand corruption.


Mission and Aims

The European Union Anti-Corruption Initiative EUACI in Ukraine was created to strengthen the capability of the anti-corruption institutions and increasing parliamentary, civic society and media control over the reforms in Ukraine.
The aims of the program were as follows:

improvement of anti-corruption politics implementation
facilitation of reduction in large scale corruption
strengthening of operational and legislative potential of state institutions in prevention and elimination of corruption
increase of parliamentary supervision of reforms, and potential of studying and improving the strategic legislative basis
increase of the potential of local governments, public and media which would enable them to contribute towards anti-corruption activities


Funding
The overall budget of the program was 15.84 million euros. The immediate executor of the program representing the Kingdom of Denmark was DANIDA. The project was implemented as international technical aid, according to Contract No 3582–01 from 15 March 2017, under the Framework Agreement between Ukraine and European Commission (ratified together with the notice under the Law 360–VI (360–17) from 3 September 2008). It became the first large scale project aimed at fighting corruption.


Implementation
The program was expected to be implemented over a period of 3 years, between 15 December 2016 – 14 December 2019. It comprised three components:

Support of state agencies dealing with the prevention and fight against corruption.
The assistance to Ukrainian parliament implementation of anti-corruption reforms.
The assistance for local government, civil society, and media of anti-corruption activities (integrity cities, civil society organisations, investigative journalists).


Component 1 Support of state agencies
EUACI provided consultative, organisational and financial assistance to the special anti-corruption institutions in the following 8 projects:

IT equipment for The Asset Recovery and Management Agency of Ukraine
Technical support for the Regional Press Development Institute
Analysis of the business processes used for the electronic tax declarations
This analysis includes identification of problems and development of measures allowing to make necessary improvements in the business processes used for the tax declaration evaluation. The project was delivered together with the National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine (in October 2017).
Creation of a learning working group led by Eric Heldna (the length of this project was half a year)
Assistance in typological research allowing to discover new trends and schemes in money laundering and financing of terrorism (the project was carried out by the State Financial Monitoring Service of Ukraine)
A learning visit to Lithuania for the SAPO and NABU employees (28–29 August 2017)
A visit of the NABU delegation to the Eurojust in The Hague, Netherlands (14–15 March 2018)
NABU professionals attended studies in Vilnius, Lithuania (19–21 March 2018).


Component 2 assistance to Ukrainian parliament
Implemented projects:

Creation of International Anti-Corruption Advisory Board (IACAB)
The IACAB was created on 8 September 2017 as a result of the a Letter of Intent being signed between the Verkhovna Rada Anti-Corruption Committee and EUACI.
It consists of the following members: Carlos Castresana, Anca Jurma, Giovanni Kessler, Drago Kos, Jesper Hjortenberg, Daniel Thelesklaf.
IACAB professionals perform analysis of anti-corruption efforts in Ukraine in the areas of investigation, criminal persecution and court consideration of high-profile corruption cases. The experts create reports based on the results of their analysis and provide recommendations to improve the efficiency of Ukrainian anti-corruption institutions.


Component 3 assisting local government, civil society, and media
Implemented projects:

Financial support for the project "Local Community Engagement in Anti-Corruption Advocacy Programs with the Assistance of Civic Anti-Corruption Investigations, Supervision and Civic Education". The project is expected to last for one year and will be implemented by the "School of Civic Education" which was created by the civic organisation "Stop Corruption", the Institute of Civic Education "Kyiv Mohyla Academy" and ACREC (Anti-Corruption Research and Education Centre). During a year a series of training sessions for the activists of "Stop Corruption" will take place; an anti-corruption research and campaign will be carried out in a number of cities.
26–28 January 2018 – the first module of the "School of Civic Education"
16–18 March 2018 – the second module of the "School of Civic Education"
Support for journalist investigations
Grant competition for anti-corruption investigations (October – November 2017)
Support for a 5-day data journalism school (10–14 October 2017)
Support for the 9th Conference of Investigative Journalism (8–9 December 2017)
Training sessions for journalists: "Technologies of Journalist Investigations" (Kharkiv, 23–27 September 2017), "Journalist Investigations of Corruption and Malpractice in Communal Enterprise" (Kyiv, 17–18 December 2017), "New Investigators – the School for Regional Journalists" (Kyiv, 27–31 January 2018), "The Correct Ways of Reading Legal Documents" (Kyiv, 16 March 2018), "Video Storytelling: Create a Story the World Will Understand" (Kyiv, 30 March – 1 April 2018)
Collaboration with "Integrity Cities" – an anti-corruption program that is planned to be implemented in 6 cities of Ukraine
In a number of selected cities the analysis of corruption risks will be performed, the ways of their elimination will be identified, and anti-corruption tools will be created and implemented. The agreement has been reached and a letter of intent has been signed for cooperation with Chernivtsi.
The Corruption Park
On 1 June 2018, the Corruption Park hosted by the EUACI was opened in Kyiv. This is the first project of this kind in Ukraine. The aim of the Corruption Park is to expand knowledge about corruption as a mischief, to youth and children mainly.
It is an interactive park that uses images, virtual reality, 3D technologies, touchscreens and installations to explain not only what corruption is but also what is done to eradicate it in Ukraine.
The park comprises nine inflatable tents, total square is 700 sq. m. Each tent exhibits the various aspects of the top corruption and shows its influence on the lives of regular people.
Additionally, an anti-lecture hall works here, film screenings and activities for children take place.


Team
As of 2018, EUACI included both Ukrainian and foreign professionals:

Eka Tkeshelashvili – Head of programme
Elena Konceviciute – Senior anti-corruption advisor
Barbara James – Head of administration
Clemence Muller – Senior anti-corruption advisor
Bogdan Boyko – Civil society and local governance expert
Serhiy Derkach – Anti-corruption investigation and prosecution expert
Halyna Kokhan – Anti-corruption and prevention expert
Vitaliy Veselskiy – Information technology expert
Katerina Bazayants – Finance and administration manager
Anastasiia Shevkoplyas – Programme Administrative Associate
Volodymyr Solohub – Communications expert
A Steering Committee was established in order to enable common decision making for implementation of anti-corruption initiatives between the Kingdom of Denmark, EU mission in Ukraine and main institutional beneficiaries.
As of 2018, the members of the Steering Committee of the Anti-Corruption Initiative of the European Union in Ukraine were as follows:

A Minister from the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine
National Agency on Corruption Prevention
National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine
State Financial Monitoring Service of Ukraine
Asset Recovery and Management Agency of Ukraine
Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor's Office
Verkhovna Rada Anti-Corruption Committee
Institute of Regional Press Development
Mayors of "Integrity Cities"
Ambassador of the Kingdom of Denmark in Ukraine
Designated Official from European Union mission in Ukraine


See also
2020–2022 Ukrainian constitutional crisis
Civil Oversight Council of the National Anti-corruption Bureau of Ukraine
Corruption in Ukraine
High Anti-Corruption Court of Ukraine – Ukrainian court concerning corruption in Ukraine
List of anti-corruption agencies
National Agency on Corruption Prevention – Ukrainian government agency
National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine – Ukrainian watchdog agency


References


External links
EUACI Official site
Concept Note of EUACI Archived 20 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine

Franklin Clair Ross (January 3, 1895 – January 17, 1956) was a Democratic Party politician and lawyer from Pennsylvania. He served as the 60th Treasurer of Pennsylvania from 1937 to 1941, as the 35th Pennsylvania Auditor General from 1941 to 1945, and on the Superior Court of Pennsylvania from 1945 until his death in 1956.


Biography
The son of Clement V. and Maud McElwaine, Ross grew up in Sandy Lake, Mercer County, Pennsylvania. He graduated from Grove City College in 1914 and afterwards taught at Derry High School in Washington County. A veteran of World War I, he served with the United States Army Signal Corps as an aviator.
Ross graduated from Columbia Law School, studying under future U.S. Supreme Court Justice Harlan F. Stone, and was admitted to the Butler County Pennsylvania Bar in 1924. He served as an attorney at Brandon, Brandon, & Ross before entering political life.  An active Democrat, Ross was appointed as deputy attorney general in the administration of Governor George Earle. In 1936, Ross was elected the 60th Pennsylvania Treasurer, and in 1940 he won a term as Pennsylvania Auditor General. After a protracted primary battle, Ross was nominated as the Democratic candidate for governor in 1942, but he was defeated by Edward Martin. In 1944, Ross won a seat on a seat on the Pennsylvania Superior Court, defeating former governor Arthur James. He suffered a heart attack in 1948 and died of a heart-related complications shortly after leaving a court session at the Philadelphia City Hall on January 17, 1956. He was survived by his wife, Carrie E. Bennett, and two daughters.


References

The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Branch Office is one of the two Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond branch offices. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's Baltimore Branch is an operational and regional center for Maryland, the metropolitan Washington D.C. area, Northern Virginia, and northeastern West Virginia.  The Baltimore branch is part of the Fifth District and has the code E5. It supports Check 21 operations, supplies coin and currency to financial institutions and works to maintain stability in the financial sector throughout the Fifth District and also works with local elected officials and non-profit organizations to support fair housing initiatives throughout the Fifth District. The Baltimore branch was founded in March 1918 and is currently headed by William R. Roberts.

Each branch of the Federal Reserve Banks has a board of either seven or five directors, a majority of whom are appointed by the parent Federal Reserve Bank; the others are appointed by the Board of Governors. Branch directors serve staggered three-year terms (two-year terms if the Branch has five directors). One of the members appointed by the Federal Reserve Board is designated annually as chairman of the board of that Branch in a manner prescribed by the parent Federal Reserve Bank. 
The Baltimore branch currently allows private and educational tours of up to thirty people with reservations. Cell phones and cameras are not permitted inside the building. The  Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Branch Office sponsors the annual Fed Challenge to encourage better understanding of the nation's central bank and the forces influencing economic conditions in the United States and abroad.
In 1997, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond- Baltimore Branch won the silver U.S. Senate Productivity and Maryland Quality Award. In 2008, Dorothy Voorhees received the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Branch 2008 Excellence Award for outstanding achievement in the study of economics.


News
On April 18, 2009, the Baltimore branch office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond will no longer process checks, and banks currently served by that office will be reassigned to the head office of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.


Historic building

The previous Baltimore Federal Reserve Branch Bank building is a historic bank  building. It is a  masonry and steel, ten story building and five bays wide on each elevation, designed in 1926 in the Second Renaissance Revival Style. The exterior features rusticated limestone facing, with carvings and enormous arched windows on the first floor. The interior features an enormous main banking room with floors, teller stations, and Corinthian columns all of polished marble. It was expanded in 1956. It is now the Lenore Apartments.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Baltimore Branch was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1983. It is included within the Baltimore National Heritage Area


Employment
Employees of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Branch Office are not government employees. Instead, they are paid as part of the expenses of their employing Reserve Bank. This means that they are not eligible for federal employee benefits which include healthcare, additional legal rights, and a government pension.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Baltimore Branch has a 2009 Spring Student Internship Paid
Position available to junior and senior college students. Students must be able to work
between 16–24 hours per week and the starting salary begins at $18.98 per hour. The students are required to relocate to Baltimore, Maryland as part of their internship.


Current Board of Directors
The following people are on the board of directors as of 2013:


Appointed by the Federal Reserve Bank


Appointed by the Board of Governors


Conferences
"Understanding New Markets Tax Credits," Wall Street Without Walls Training Workshop at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Baltimore Branch, Baltimore, Maryland, July 22, 2003.
"Transitional Employment Models," The Enterprise Foundation Ready, Work, Grow National Workforce Conference, Baltimore, Maryland, April 2003.


See also

Federal Reserve Act
Federal Reserve System
Federal Reserve Districts
Federal Reserve Branches
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Charlotte Branch Office


References


Citations
Straw, Becky (December 16, 2008). "Economics students participate in Fed Challenge competition". News Article. College of Business and Economics Lehigh University • 621 Taylor Street, Rauch Business Center, Bethlehem, PA 18015. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved February 20, 2009.
"Benton Wilmoth '05 Learns through White House and Export-Import Bank Internships:Lafayette stipend supports summer work experience in Washington". Academic News. Lafayette College. June 17, 2004. Archived from the original on March 5, 2007. Retrieved February 21, 2009.
"Campus Invited to Watch Final Practice Run for College Fed Challenge Today:Students preparing for presentation to Federal Reserve Bank economists and officers". Student Activities. Lafayette College. November 12, 2003. Archived from the original on September 6, 2006. Retrieved February 21, 2009.


External links
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Branch Office
Baltimore Branch Education Contacts Archived 2009-02-21 at the Wayback Machine
A day at the fed
State/index.cfm#tabview=tab1 State Member Banks
Baltimore Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Baltimore City, including photo from 1985, at Maryland Historical Trust
Federal Reserve Education
College Fed Challenge Resource Page
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Education
List of Federal Reserve Branches and contact details

First Church of Christ, Scientist is a historic Christian Science church building located at 902 Division Avenue at the corner of I (Eye) Street in Tacoma, Washington. Designed in the Classical Revival style by noted as well as prolific Tacoma architect Frederick Heath, it was built at a cost of $45,000 between 1908 and 1911. It was the second building built by the congregation on this site, the first being a 1901 wooden structure seating 300 that was torn down in 1908. On June 2, 1911, the first service was held in the new church. After becoming debt free, the new church was dedicated in 1921.


History
Established in 1894, the church held services in a rented hall at 1113½ South Tacoma Avenue before moving to the present site. During construction of the present building, the church met in the now razed Masonic Temple at 740 St. Helens Avenue.


Current status
Today First Church is still an active branch of the Christian Science Mother Church and is still located in this building.


References


External links
First Church of Christ, Scientist website

Fontenoy United F.C. is a Grenadian professional football club from the neighborhood of Fontenoy St. George's, Grenada that plays in the GFA Premier Division.


Honours
Grenada Premier Division:
Champions (1): 1998


References


External links

The Footscray Wharves Precinct, also known as the Saltwater River Crossing Site and Footscray Wharves Precinct, is an historical former working port, wharves, river crossing location, disused industrial site, and the location for early residential housing, situated on the west bank of the Maribyrnong River, located in Footscray, an inner-western suburb of Melbourne, in Victoria, Australia. The site contains significant archaeological remains which illustrate the colonial development of the area in terms of the presence of public houses, residences and intensive industry. 
Located on the traditional lands of the Wurundjeri Woi Wurrung and the Bunurong people, the precinct was added to the Victorian Heritage Register on 11 December 1997 in recognition of its historical, archaeological and social importance. Various other elements of the site were added to non-statutory heritage lists, including the bluestone steps on the wharf.
Since the early 2020s, the Victorian Government and City of Maribyrnong have redeveloped some of the site for community use and increasingly high-density residential apartments.


Location
The precinct is located on the west bank of the Maribyrnong River, running south from Hopkins Street, and bounded by Moreland, Bunbury, Wingfield, Napier, and Maribyrnong streets. Included in the site are a number of significant above ground structures including the red brick construction associated with the Michaelis Hallenstein tannery operation, two bluestone cottages in Bunbury Street, the former Schwartz Boathouse and Henderson House, the latter also listed on the Victorian Heritage Register. Elements of the heritage curtail are located on the river's edge.


History
The site has a close association with the earliest stages of the history of colonial Victoria, and was the 1803 location for Charles Grimes, the Acting Surveyor-General, to land ashore.
Known as the Saltwater River until 1913, the Maribyrnong River was a major transport route in the colonised District of Port Phillip. Prior to 1939, the only crossing of the river was at a ford located at what is now known as Avondale Heights. In 1839 a punt service was established to cross the river near its junction with the Yarra for travellers from Melbourne to access  Williamstown, Geelong, and beyond. A settlement evolved around the punt's western shore that became known as Footscray, although it was initially called Saltwater. 
Industrialisation of the area commenced from the 1840s, including abattoirs, piggeries, tanneries, and the production of tallow for candles and soap. By the 1860s and 1870s, the Footscray area attracted a range of industries that clustered along the river bank, and was a source of employment for those who settled west of the river. In the 1880s, the Melbourne Harbour Trust extended an existing timber wharf to support industrial growth—including fertiliser and chemical production —that continued throughout most of the nineteenth and first half of the twentieth centuries. During this period, the river's water quality was subject to severe environmental degradation. A decline in the manufacturing industry followed in the 1960s and 1970s and subsequently, following rehabilitation of the precinct, the former industrial areas along the river were redeveloped into high-density residential areas, or preserved for heritage.


Description
As an early transport node, the precinct illustrates the historical development of the Port Phillip District and the relationship between the provision of transport facilities, the establishment of public houses and wharves, the expansion of maritime transport, the development of heavy industry, and the founding of the settlement of Footscray, including residential development. Notable structures that are retained in the precinct include Henderson House, cottages on Bunbury Street, Schwartz's Boathouse and parts of the former Michaelis Hallenstein Tannery. An historical rail spur line, to support industrial development, was built alongside the western banks of the river in 1917.
The area went into decline in the interwar period. After World War II, most of the vacant allotments were filled with factories and workshops and families left for other less-polluted areas, some renting their houses. During this period all the hotels in the area were delicensed and subsequently demolished or incorporated into factory developments.  


Wharves
When the Melbourne Harbour Trust was constituted to manage the Port of Melbourne in 1877, it assumed responsibility for the Saltwater River as far as Hopkins Street. In 1878, the Trust extended an existing 37-metre (122 ft) timber wharf on the western bank of the river to 183 metres (600 ft) and installed sheet piling, filled with silt and metal by-products from the adjacent industries. The wharf was extended by 61 metres (200 ft) a year later and to 281 metres (922 ft) by 1881. Additionally, the Trust dredged part of the river to accommodate the vessels accessing the wharves.


Hotels
The Victoria Hotel, on or near the corner of Bunbury and Maribyrnong Streets, was the first public house in the area, opened in November 1840 on the river's western bank, licensed to B. G. (Benjamin Goldsmid) Levien, who also took out the first pastoral lease, and operated a punt service between West Melbourne until 1845. The hotel was rebuilt as the Ship Inn until 1917, and it was demolished in 1970. By the late 1850s there were three hotels operating near the river crossing at Footscray. The hotels serviced travellers and workers employed at boat and ship repair works in floating docks on the eastern side of the river opposite the Ship Inn in the 1850s and the river crossing at Footscray was described as a scene of 'bustle and activity' in the 1860s.


Industry
Slaughter houses, boiling down works, and meat processing works were established in the area from the 1840s. Henderson's piggery was constructed for Samuel Henderson in 1872-1873. The complex of buildings included a factory for bacon and ham curing and a residence. Isaac Hallenstein purchased a tannery on the north side of Hopkins Street in 1864. After his uncle Moritz Michaelis joined him in business, the tannery site extended to the southern side of Hopkins Street, facing the river.

Former piggery and tannery factories

Henderson constructed a large brick and stone premises in 1872 for his Bacon and Ham Curing Establishment, yet he only operated it for a short time. Wooden cottages on the site were rented to labourers until c. 1899. The stone house was also rented and the factory lay unused until 1901 when a meat preserving works operated until 1915. The house, factory, stables and land were acquired by Swallow and Ariel in 1921 and used the site until the late 1950s, at which time the bluestone house ceased to be used as a residence. The factory buildings and stables were demolished in 1969. The site, together with Henderson's House and part of the curing works are extant, and were purchased by the City of Footscray in 1981 and repurposed for use by Footscray Community Arts.
Isaac Hallenstein established a tannery to the north of Hopkins Street in 1864. He was joined in the business by a nephew, Moritz Michaelis and between them they created a successful business with branches in London, Sydney and New Zealand. In 1901 they purchased all the land north of Kepert's Tannery and the Bridge Hotel. They constructed a brick electric power plant in Maribyrnong Street, north of the Bridge Hotel but left the remainder of the site undeveloped until after World War I. The company's leather department is listed on the site from 1911 onwards, to the south of Hopkins Street. A 1906 description of the tannery refers to it as the largest in the southern hemisphere, occupying a site of c.two-hectare (five-acre). Further developments were made during the 1920s and 1930s until the 1980s when the entire site was transferred to the City of Footscray in 1984.


Dwellings
Margaret Pickett Cottages
Very few houses appear to have been constructed within the area during the early years of town formation in Footscray. A scattering of houses were constructed near the Bridge Hotel in Maribyrnong Street during the 1860s and 1870s, and in Moreland and Maribyrnong Streets to the north of the public reserve. William Picket purchased the two blocks along the southern side of Wingfield street in 1850 and in 1872 William Picket jnr sold both allotments to his widowed mother. Two houses were built on the Maribyrnong Street frontage of Allotment 8 in the mid 1870s by Margaret Picket. They were later owned by two prominent local councillor-businessmen, William Mitchell and David Newell. They were demolished in the 1897-98. Allotment 9, which had previously contained the Picket family home, is recorded as vacant land from 1882 until post-WWI.

Bunbury Street cottages
Prior to the 1880s the site contained very few residences. The boom of the 1880s however led to increased land subdivision and house building. For the most part the new homes were timber built, single-storey detached houses on large allotments. Generally residences were confined to a Moreland Street pocket, running south from Bunbury Street.

Schwartz residence and boathouse
Until after the turn of the century the only structures north of the Stanley Arms Hotel were the Schwartz family home and boatshed off Bunbury and Maribyrnong Streets. Schwartz and his partner were contractors for the Melbourne Harbor Trust's 1890 wharfage expansion program. After his death the property was subdivided and sold, the boatshed was bought by the owner of the Stanley Arms Hotel and was to later become a drill hall, then workshop for John R. Bell and Company. The former boatshed was not destroyed as part of the Ship Inn demolition and remains intact.

Other dwellings
The large middle block between Wingfield and Bunbury Street remained vacant land through most of this period. In the mid-1880s a pair of stone row houses was built at the corner of Bunbury and Moreland streets. They were occupied by tenants until 1899 when they were bought by Louis Benjamin, the then Hallenstein's tannery manager. He lived there until the 1920s. The industrial encroachment finally encompassed the cottages and the buildings were incorporated into a factory complex.


See also

Architecture of Melbourne
Port of Melbourne
History of Melbourne
List of places on the Victorian Heritage Register in the City of Maribyrnong


References


Further reading
Barnard, Jill; Butler, Graeme; Gilfedder, Francine; Vinces, Gary (2000). Maribyrnong City Heritage Review (Report). City of Maribyrnong.
Lack, John (1991). A History of Footscray. North Melbourne: Hargreen.
Lack, John, ed. (1993). Charlie Lovett's Footscray. City of Footscray Historical Society.


External links
"Home page". Footscray Historical Society. n.d. Retrieved 23 June 2026.
"The Inner West". Museums Victoria. n.d. Retrieved 23 June 2026.
"Fitzroy Wharves" (includes historic and contemporary images of the wharves). Melbourne's Liiving Museum of the West, Inc. n.d. Retrieved 23 June 2026.

Fractography is the study of the fracture surfaces of materials. Fractographic methods are routinely used to determine the cause of failure in engineering structures, especially in product failure and the practice of forensic engineering or failure analysis. In material science research, fractography is used to develop and evaluate theoretical models of crack growth behavior.
One of the aims of fractographic examination is to determine the cause of failure by studying the characteristics of a fractured surface.  Different types of crack growth (e.g. fatigue, stress corrosion cracking, hydrogen embrittlement) produce characteristic features on the surface, which can be used to help identify the failure mode. The overall pattern of cracking can be more important than a single crack, however, especially in the case of brittle materials like ceramics and glasses.


Usage

Fractography is a widely used technique in forensic engineering, forensic materials engineering and fracture mechanics to understand the causes of failures and also to verify theoretical failure predictions with real life failures. It is of use in forensic science for analysing broken products which have been used as weapons, such as broken bottles for example. Thus a defendant might claim that a bottle was faulty and broke accidentally when it impacted a victim of an assault. Fractography could show the allegation to be false, and that considerable force was needed to smash the bottle before using the broken end as a weapon to deliberately attack the victim. Bullet holes in glass windscreens or windows can also indicate the direction of impact and the energy of the projectile. In these cases, the overall pattern of cracking is vital to reconstructing the sequence of events, rather than the specific characteristics of a single crack. Fractography can determine whether a cause of train derailment was a faulty rail, or if a wing of a plane had fatigue cracks before a crash.
Fractography is used also in materials research, since fracture properties can correlate with other properties and with structure of materials.


Feature identification


Origin
An important aim of fractography is to establish and examine the origin of cracking, as examination at the origin may reveal the cause of crack initiation.  Initial fractographic examination is commonly carried out on a macro scale utilising low power optical microscopy and oblique lighting techniques to identify the extent of cracking, possible modes and likely origins. Optical microscopy or macrophotography are often enough to pinpoint the nature of the failure and the causes of crack initiation and growth if the loading pattern is known.
Common features that may cause crack initiation are inclusions, voids or empty holes in the material, contamination, and stress concentrations.


Fatigue crack growth
The image of a broken crankshaft shows the component failed from a surface defect near the bulb at lower centre. The semi-circular marks near the origin indicate a crack growing up into the bulk material by process known as fatigue. The crankshaft also shows hachures, which are the lines on fracture surfaces that can be traced back to the origin of the fracture. Some modes of crack growth can leave characteristic marks on the surface that identify the mode of crack growth and origin on a macro scale e.g. beachmarks or striations on fatigue cracks.


Microscopy
Microscopes can be used to determine the initiation point and the mechanism that caused crack growth. The information can be obtained from images of the fracture surface known as fractographs and used in constructing diagrams. A schematic fracture surface map can be used to isolate and identify the features on the surface which show how the product failed. Such a map can be a valuable way of presenting information which shows clearly how a crack was initiated which grew with time.


USB Microscopy
USB microscopes are especially useful for examining fracture surface features since they are small enough to be hand-held. A variety of camera sizes and resolution are available commercially at low cost. The camera cable plugs into the computer via a USB plug and most such devices come with illumination at the camera supplied by LED lights.


Scanning electron microscopy

In many cases, fractography requires examination at a finer scale, which is usually carried out in a scanning electron microscope or SEM. The resolution is much higher than the optical microscope, although samples are examined in a partial vacuum and colour is absent. Improved SEM's now allow examination at near atmospheric pressures, so allowing examination of sensitive materials such as  those of biological origin. 
The SEM is especially useful when combined with Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy or EDX, which can be performed in the microscope, so very small areas of the sample can be analysed for their elemental composition.


Example


Breast implant
A cusp is formed where brittle cracks meet, as shown on the picture of a failed catheter (Cp). The cusp was formed by brittle failure of the catheter on a breast implant in silicone rubber. The origin of the cracks is at the shoulder at the left-hand side. Identifying such features will allow a fracture surface map to be made of the surface being studied. The implant failed because of overload, all the imposed loads being concentrated at the connection between the catheter and the bag holding salt solution. As a result, the patient reported loss of fluid from the implant, and it was extracted surgically and replaced.
In the case of the failed breast implant catheter, the crack path was very simple, but the cause more subtle. Further scanning electron microscopy showed numerous microcracks between the bag and the catheter, indicating that the adhesive bond between the two components had failed prematurely, perhaps through faulty manufacture. The material of construction of both bag and catheter, silicone rubber is a physically weak elastomer, and product design must allow for the low tear or shear strength of the material.


Maritime Patrol Aircraft
A non-critical crack occurred in the fastener hole of a lower wing plank. The plank was made from a 3.2 mm thick AA7075-T6 aluminium alloy. The time of the detection of the crack and the aircraft's counting g-meter allowed investigators to find out the load on the aircraft from use. The cracks on an SEM showed evidence and patterns of fatigue. The cyclic load and fatigue appeared to have progressively gone worse with some cracks being large and others being small in length and width indicating occasional force stronger than 2> g's. The g-meter showed that the aircraft had flown 2,500 flights, with the g force and acceleration occasionally exceeding more than 2 G's. This was more than the maximum advertised for the manufacturer. The conclusion was that fatigue and cracks should be inspected regularly on old or commonly used aircraft. The study also found novel ways for Quantitative fractography to be used on aircraft, which compares load history (in this case the g-meter) and records of the alloy experiencing fatigue in a lab setting with different pressure, cycles, and temperatures. The study used the database of cracks to create a model that predicts forces and crack progression.


See also
Conchoidal fracture
Fatigue (material)
Failure analysis
Forensic engineering
Forensic materials engineering
Fracture
Forensic polymer engineering
Forensic science


References

Lewis, Peter Rhys, Reynolds, K, and Gagg, C, Forensic Materials Engineering: Case studies, CRC Press (2004).
Mills, Kathleen  Fractography, American Society of Metals (ASM) handbook, volume 12 (1991).
N.T. Goldsmith, R.J.H. Wanhill, L. Molent, Quantitative fractography of fatigue and an illustrative case study,  Engineering Failure Analysis, volume 96 (February 2019) Pages 426–435.

Frederick Heath (April 15, 1861 – March 3, 1953) was an American architect responsible for numerous projects in Tacoma, Washington. He worked out of his own office and as a senior partner at architectural firms. He was involved with Spaulding, Russell & Heath (with Ambrose J. Russell), and Heath & Gove (later Heath, Gove & Bell). His work included designs for several historic and notable schools, churches, stadiums, and commercial properties.


Background
Heath was born in LaCrosse, Wisconsin, and raised in Minnesota, where he attended Powell's Academy. His father was William Heath and his mother Elizabeth Noyes. He was of English ancestry and his ancestors included General William Heath who served on the staff of General George Washington.


Career

Heath started off as a printer before working on architectural drafts in the office of Warren H. Hayes, where he was chief draftsman, for ten years. He helped design many buildings in Minneapolis and St. Paul, Minnesota. He also worked on a large number of churches in the U.S. and many schools.


Work in Tacoma

Heath arrived in Washington at age 34 and started working in 1898, establishing his practice in 1901. The buildings he designed have been said to include "some of the most notable and beautiful structures of the city."
Heath was the City of Tacoma's official school architect. He also designed the Masonic temple in North Yakima along the lines of interpretive reconstructions of King Solomon's Temple. He planned the 18-story National Realty Building in Tacoma— at the time the tallest building west of the Mississippi River— as well as a number of schools, such as Stadium High School (the original building designed by Hewitt & Hewitt of Philadelphia was burned, leaving just a shell), Lincoln High School, Central School, and Oakland Alternative High School. Heath's work also includes St. Patrick's, First Church of Christ Scientist, and First Lutheran, First Baptist. He is credited alone with the Forbes P. Haskil, Jr. residence at 521 North Ainsworth (1906).
His designed the 1914 public library on Railroad Avenue and Fifth, Stadium Bowl in Tacoma, and Paradise Inn at Mount Rainier.
Heath was known as the "Father of the Stadium" for his work on Stadium Bowl in Tacoma, one of his best-known projects. Fellow architect Ambrose J. Russell worked in his Tacoma office.
He designed the Nereides Baths, which were located in Point Defiance Park between 1906 and 1931. The "eclectic building was constructed of logs and somewhat resembled a Swiss chalet". It was an attraction for the area that included Tacoma's first indoor swimming pool. Heath served as president of the park board from 1911 until 1916. His "600 projects in the Northwest and in Tacoma" included Tacoma's St. Patrick's, First Church of Christian Scientist, First Lutheran and First Baptist. He also completed store designs for "the old" Rhodes and Bon Marche department stores on Broadway. Heath continued to work until two weeks before he died in March 1953, "just a month shy of his 92nd birthday." Heath also worked on designs for the Greek Theater (Los Angeles) in Griffith Park, Los Angeles.
Heath was a member of several organizations including: Member, Commercial Club of Tacoma, Tacoma, WA,1909-1917; Member, Knights of Pythias, Commerce Lodge #7, 1906-1917; Life Member, Mason's Lebanon Lodge #104; Thirty-second degree Mason and Noble of Mystic Shire, 1917; Mason, Royal Arch Chapter, The Red Cross of Constantine; Thirty-second degree, Tacoma Consistory of Scottish Rite, 1910
Heath married Mabel Fallensbee in January 1885, and had a daughter and two sons.


Heath, Gove & Bell

Heath's firm, Heath, Gove & Bell, designed the 6th Avenue Baptist Church, the Masonic Home of Washington in Des Moines, and the Sitka Pioneers' Home in Sitka, Alaska. Heath was also involved in the Spaulding, Russell & Heath (Spaulding was a marine architect and was only with the firm for a year) was designed the Frederick H. Murray Residence at 402 North Sheridan Avenue (1901) and the Burton A. Moore Residence at 414 North Sheridan Avenue (1901) in the Tacoma's historic North Slope area. The firm was contracted to supervise the reconstruction of Olympia's old state capitol building after a fire.


Legacy

The Paradise Inn at Mount Rainier (1915) that Heath's firm designed is listed as a landmark on the National Register of Historic Places and the building was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1987.
Pythian Temple was added to the National Register of Historic Places on August 23, 1985.
Stadium High School, featured in the 1999 film 10 Things I Hate About You, underwent a two-year $80 million renovation starting in 2004. The work won several awards.
The Masonic Home of Washington's library was featured in the 2013 film “The Maury Island Incident”.
In 2008, plans for restorations and renovations of historic Tacoma schools, including several designed by Heath and his firm Heath & Gove, were discussed.
Stadium High School and the Pythian Temple, housing the fraternal Order of the Knights of Pythias, were featured by the Society of Architectural Historians Marian Dean Ross Pacific Northwest Chapter in their summer 2008 newsletter. The group reported that the Pythias order remains active and is working to preserve its 1906 building and received grants for work on the Knight's of Castle Hall, a "two-story hall, completely hidden within the building's interior, is a rich confection of early 20th Century woodwork, plaster, lighting, murals and carpeting."


Some of Heath's completed projects

Pythian Temple 924-9261⁄2 Broadway, Tacoma (1906) Listed on the National Register of Historic Places
Stadium High School, 111 N E St, Tacoma (1906)
Tacoma Grocery Co. building, 2108-12 Pacific Avenue (1906)
Morris-Miller Co. building, 2102-06 Pacific Avenue (1906)
Bowes Building 100 South 9th Street, Tacoma (1907) in Tacoma
McKinley Elementary School at 3702 McKinley Ave. (East Side) (1908)
Barlow Annex at 3012 S. 59th St. (South Tacoma) (1910)
Fern Hill Elementary at 8442 S. Park (South Tacoma) (1911) A Heath and Gove project.
Central School at 601 South 8th Street (New Tacoma) (1912) A Heath and George Gove project.
Oakland Alternative High School at 3319 South Adams Street (South End) (1912) A Heath and Gove project.
Park Avenue School at 6701 S. Park Ave. (South End) (1912) A Heath and Gove project.
Public library on Railroad and Fifth in Shelton, WA
Lincoln High School, 701 South 37th Street, Tacoma (1913)
Paradise Inn at Mount Rainier (1915)
National Realty Building (once home to Heritage Bank and Puget Sound National Bank Building) 1119 Pacific Avenue, Tacoma (1911) (16 floors) Heath, Gove & Bell 
First Church of Christ Scientist (1908–1911) (across the street from Wright Park) in Tacoma, Washington
Trommald Building (1915), Enumclaw, Washington
Auburn Masonic Temple at 10 Auburn Way, Auburn, Washington (1924) Heath, Gove & Bell

Masonic Home of Washington, 23660 Marine View Dr S, Des Moines, Washington (1926) Heath, Gove & Bell 
Wilkeson School, State Route 165, Wilkeson, Washington


Parks
Heath drew up plans for an open air 10,000 seat amphitheater that was proposed for Mount Rubidoux in Riverside, California in 1918. The theater was to be used for conventions and the "established" Easter sunrise service.

Nereides Baths (1906) located in Point Defiance Park between 1906 and 1931
Greek Theater in Griffith Park


See also
 Pacific Northwest portal


References


External links
Image of two buildings Heath designed from Tacoma Public Library. "Tacoma Grocery Co. building, 2108-12 Pacific Ave., built in 1906 and designed by Frederick Heath. To the far right is the Morris-Miller Co. building, 2102-06 Pacific Ave., also built in 1906 from a design by Frederick Heath. In 2000, these three turn of the century warehouses were purchased and remodeled into 150,000 square feet of office space called the Horizon Pacific Center by Oakland, Ca. developer Michael Bartlett. Mr. Bartlett and his firm, Horizon Partners, designed the space to attract high tech companies from costlier real estate areas such as Seattle and Bellevue"
Archival photo of First Lutheran Church Archived 2011-07-28 at the Wayback Machine
Masonic Home in Zenith, Washington
http://pcad.lib.washington.edu/person/840/?hc_location=ufi

GLGE is a programming library for use with WebGL and JavaScript.
GLGE is a JavaScript library intended to ease the use of WebGL, a native browser JavaScript API giving direct access to OpenGL ES 2, allowing for the use of hardware accelerated 2D and 3D applications without having to download any plugins.
The aim of GLGE is to mask the involved nature of WebGL from the web developer, who can then spend their time creating richer content for the web.


Main features
Keyframe animation
Per-pixel lighting directional lights, spot lights and point lights
Normal mapping
Animated materials
Skeletal animation
COLLADA format support
Parallax mapping
Text rendering
Fog
Depth Shadows
Shader-based picking
Environment mapping
Reflections/Refractions
Collada Animations
Portals
LOD
Culling
2D filters


References


External links
Official Site Archived 2022-03-03 at the Wayback Machine
Source Code

Gail Wight (born 1960, in Sunny Valley, Connecticut) is an American new media artist and professor, whose work fuses art with biology, neurology, and technology. Popular media Wight uses to create art include, drawing and painting, electronic sculpture, interactive sculpture, video and living mediums. Since 2003, Wight has taught at Stanford University in the Department of Art.


Early life and education
In 1988, she received her B.F.A. from the Studio for Interrelated Media at the Massachusetts College of Art and Design in Boston, and in 1994, she received an M.F.A. in New Genres from the San Francisco Art Institute.


Career
Wight began as a research assistant in 1988 at the Design Lab of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and in 2003, she started her teaching career at Mills College in Oakland, California, as an assistant professor, as well as the director and co-founder of their Intermedia Arts program. In 2003, she moved to teaching at Stanford University, where she is an associate professor in the department of Art and Art History, teaching courses in experimental media arts.
As an artist, she works at the intersection of art and science, especially biology, neuroscience, and the history of technology. She explores, often humorously, how muddled our understanding of life and human relationships can become when we rely too much on science to explain our lives. In a 2008 project, Ground Plane, for example, she photographed fossil bones in snowflake-like patterns to create a meditation on both ephemerality and deep time. For her projects, she frequently undertakes short-term informal apprenticeships with scientists, a process she refers to as 'lurking'.
Wight's concentration on scientific and technological elements in her artwork stemmed from a childhood curiosity about a family member's illness that was never talked about. Learning all that she could about contemporary biology prompted her to branch out in her artwork, and today she works with a mix of sculpture, video, interactive media, installations, print, and text. Hydraphilia (2009) is a video installation of the microscopic growth patterns of Physarum polycephalum, better known as slime mold. Wight was inspired to use slime mold because of the organism's naturally beautiful coloration patterns that shift as it reproduces and develops. She created Hydraphilia by videotaping the growth patterns of the slime mold on agar slides, prepared with non-toxic dyes.
Wight’s 2003 series, Anatomies, evokes childhood curiosity as well. In exploded views, Wight pulls apart wind-up mechanical toys, “arranging their mechanical parts into anatomical charts, the quintessential tool of Cartesian understanding.” Elizabeth Mickaily-Huber, Ph.D., Adjunct Professor, Department of Engineering at the University of San Francisco, writes, “Gail Wight’s work brings to mind a child's natural inclination to break toys apart to understand how they work and what's inside….Gail's selection of toys goes from those that represent the genius of nature to those that represent the intellect of humans, from animals to little robots.”
Wight has exhibited widely, with solo exhibitions at the Beall Center for Art + Technology (Irvine, California), the Nevada Museum of Art (Reno), and the San Francisco Center for the Book, as well as numerous group exhibitions around the world, including the  International Biennial of Contemporary Art Of Seville (Spain), the Natural History Museum (London), and The Physics Room (Christchurch, New Zealand).


Exhibitions

These are a select list of exhibitions by Wight


Solo
2013 “All the Time in the World” Clay Center for Art & Science, Charleston, West Virginia (with Mary Tsiongas)
2012 “Ground Plane” Patricia Sweetow Gallery, San Francisco, California
2012 “Hydraphilia”, Nevada Museum of Art, Reno, Nevada
2007 “The Evolution of Disarticulation: Gail Wight, photographs, small-scale installations, and video”, University of New Mexico Art Museum, Albuquerque, New Mexico
2007 “The Anatomies” Ontario Science Museum Toronto, Ontario


Group
2021 "Pulled Apart" University of San Francisco Thacher Gallery
2006 “Unhomely: Phantom Scenes in Global Society” International Biennial of Contemporary Art Of Seville, Spain (in collaboration with Retort)


Awards and grants
Iris F. Litt Award. Clayman Institute, Stanford University, 2007
Adaline Kent Award. San Francisco, California, 2003
Anonymous Was A Woman Award. New York, New York, 2002
Wallace Gerbode Visual Arts Award. San Francisco, California, 2001
Chauncey McKeever Fine Art Award. San Francisco Art Institute, San Francisco, California, 1994
Jacob K. Javits Fellow. U.S. Department of Education, 1991-1994


References


External links
Gail Wight website

Garo (牙狼〈GARO〉; lit. "Fanged Wolf", stylized as GARO), sometimes referred to as Golden Knight Garo (黄金騎士ガロ, Ōgon Kishi Garo), is a Japanese tokusatsu television series broadcast on TV Tokyo and its affiliates from October 7, 2005, to March 31, 2006, lasting 25 episodes (with one additional "Overview" special, summarizing the events of episodes 1 through 12, aired before episode 14). The series was created and directed by Keita Amemiya (Kamen Rider ZO, Zeiram) with supporting direction from Makoto Yokoyama and Kengo Kaji . The creature designer was Yasushi Nirasawa, known for his later work as the designer of the Worms and the Imagin for respectively Kamen Rider Kabuto and Den-O, as well as for his work designing the Undeads from Kamen Rider Blade.
Since 2007, the show has also been aired in other countries such as Italy (on MTV), Malaysia (on 8TV), and Spain (on Canal Buzz). The show's HD remastered version was broadcast on TV Tokyo starting July 8, 2016. The television series is the first installment of the "GARO" metaseries, which is composed of several installments, including a live action television series, films, TV & film specials, and anime series. The television series has been licensed for a North American release by Kraken Releasing.


Plot

Garo focuses on the life of Kouga Saejima, who has assumed the title of Makai Knight to protect humanity against dark demonic manifestations called "Horrors". In his quest to destroy them, he encounters a young girl named Kaoru, whom he saves from a Horror, though he learns that she is stained with its demonic blood. As a rule, those that have been stained by the blood of a Horror must be killed, or else they will die painfully in approximately 100 days. Kouga spares Kaoru and tries to find a way to purify her before her remaining time expires. Thus, the series focuses on Kouga's developing relationship with Kaoru, and his responsibilities protecting humanity in accordance with the wishes of his father, the previous Garo. In the process, he encounters another Makai Knight named Rei Suzumura, who eventually becomes his ally. Later Kouga confronts his father's former disciple who is revealed to be the cause of a recent series of Horror attacks in preparation of a more sinister advent of the Horrors' originator, Messiah.


Horrors

The main antagonistic form in the series, Horrors are demons that reside in a realm known as the netherworld, and thrive on the darkness of humanity. The Horrors enter the human world through everyday objects known as Inga Gates, which are created through a mass of darkness. When the Horrors first come through, they also known as Inga Horrors, and must possess the body of the first human with inner darkness they come across. Because the Horrors feed on humans inner darkness, it is a Makai Knight's duty to hunt and slay the demons. Later entries in the series reveal several more types of Horrors.


Episodes


Cast
Kouga Saejima (冴島 鋼牙, Saejima Kōga): Hiroki Konishi (小西 大樹, Konishi Hiroki)
Kaoru Mitsuki (御月 カオル, Mitsuki Kaoru): Mika Hijii (肘井 美佳, Hijii Mika)
Rei Suzumura (涼邑 零, Suzumura Rei): Ray Fujita (藤田 玲, Fujita Rei)
Karune Ryuzaki (龍崎 駈音, Ryūzaki Karune): Masaki Kyomoto (京本 政樹, Kyōmoto Masaki)
Gonza Kurahashi (倉橋 ゴンザ, Kurahashi Gonza): Yukijiro Hotaru (螢 雪次朗, Hotaru Yukijirō)
Kale (ケイル, Keiru): Keaki Watanabe (渡辺 けあき, Watanabe Keaki)
Bell (ベル, Beru): Anri Okamoto (岡本 杏理, Okamoto Anri)
Rose (ローズ, Rōzu): Yukina Kashiwa (柏 幸奈, Kashiwa Yukina)
Kodama (コダマ): Mark Musashi (マーク武蔵, Māku Musashi)
Madō Ring Zaruba (魔導輪ザルバ, Madōrin Zaruba; Voice): Hironobu Kageyama (影山 ヒロノブ, Kageyama Hironobu)
Madō Necklace Silva (魔導具シルヴァ, Madōgu Shiruva; Voice): Ai Orikasa (折笠 愛, Orikasa Ai)
Kale (Voice): Fumiko Inoue (井上 富美子, Inoue Fumiko)
Bell (Voice): Machiko Kawana (川名 真知子, Kawana Machiko)
Rose (Voice): Akemi Satō (佐藤 朱, Satō Akemi)


Songs
Opening themes
"Theme of GARO"
Music by TRYFORCE and JAM Project
"Garo ~Savior in the Dark~" (牙狼～SAVIOR IN THE DARK～)
Lyrics & Composition: Hironobu Kageyama
Arrangement: Kenichi Sudō
Artist: JAM Project
Ending themes
"Garo ~Boku ga Ai o Tsutaeteyuku~" (牙狼～僕が愛を伝えてゆく～; "GARO ~I'll Keep Showing You My Love~")
Lyrics & Composition: Masaki Kyomoto
Arrangement: Harukichi Yamamoto
Artist: Masaki Kyomoto (ep. 1–13) and Garo Project (ep. 22)
"Boku wa Mada Koi o Shite wa Ikenai" (僕はまだ恋をしてはいけない; "I Shouldn't Still Be Loving")
Lyrics & Composition: Masaki Kyomoto
Arrangement: Harukichi Yamamoto
Artist: Masaki Kyomoto (ep. 14–21) and Garo Project (ep. 23 & 24)


Production
According to early concepts, Garo was originally intended to be a modernized version of the Japanese superhero character Golden Bat where he would be known as "Skull Z". 


Sequels and spin-offs
In all the sequels and spinoffs in the Garo series, Hironobu Kageyama continues to reprise his role as the voice of Zaruba in each entry.


Video games

A video game based on the series was produced by Bandai for the PlayStation 2, under the name Golden Knight Garo. Two versions were released: a 'normal' version with the game disk, instructions, and standard pamphlets, and a more expensive 'Limited Edition' version which came with a green 'Fire' recolor of the metal Zaruba ring from the "Equip and Prop Vol. 1" Garo toy.
A mobile game titled Garo: Makai no Meikyu (牙狼<GARO> -魔戒の迷宮-, Garo Makai no Meikyū; lit. "Garo: Makai Labyrinth") was released on May 27, 2016, commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Garo franchise. The game includes all characters from the live action series and the anime series.


Novels
Makai Kishi Retsuden: Hagane no Houkou (魔戒騎士列伝 鋼の咆哮, Makai Kishi Retsuden Hagane no Hōkō; lit. "Makai Knight History: Roar of Steel") was released on March 31, 2007.
Garo: Ankoku Makai Kishi Hen (牙狼〈GARO〉暗黒魔戒騎士篇; lit. "Garo: Dark Makai Knight Saga") was released on October 26, 2006. The novel's new edition including one new episode was released on October 30, 2010.
Garo: Youseki no Wana (牙狼〈GARO〉妖赤の罠, Garo Yōseki no Wana; lit. "Garo: Mystic Red Trap") was released on November 27, 2010.


Beast of the Demon Night

Garo Special: Beast of the Demon Night (牙狼〈GARO〉スペシャル 白夜の魔獣, Garo Supesharu Byakuya no Majū; lit. "Garo Special: Demon Beast of the Midnight Sun") is a two-part mini-series that premiered on Family Gekijo in December 2006.


Red Requiem

In July 2009, Tohokushinsha Film announced that a GARO feature film will be released in the fall of 2010. Garo: Red Requiem (牙狼〈GARO〉～RED REQUIEM～) was theatrically released in Japanese theaters on October 30, 2010. The story is a sequel to the original TV series, with Keita Amemiya reprising his role as head director. Ryosei Konishi and Hironobu Kageyama reprise their roles as Kouga/Garo and voice of Zaruba, with Makoto Yokoyama returning to choreograph the action sequences as well. Red Requiem uses 3D image technology developed by the Tohokushinsha group company Omnibus Japan for its visual effects.


Kiba

Kiba Gaiden (呀〈KIBA〉～暗黒騎士鎧伝～, Kiba Ankoku Kishi Gaiden; lit. "Kiba: Dark Knight Side Story"), released on September 7, 2011, is a spin-off V-Cinema featuring the story of Barago and Kiba the Dark Knight.


Makai Senki

Garo: Makai Senki (牙狼〈GARO〉～MAKAISENKI～) is a second season of the Garo television series that premiered in select Japanese theaters on September 24, 2011, before beginning broadcast on TV Tokyo on October 6, 2011.


Soukoku no Maryu

Garo: Soukoku no Maryu (牙狼〈GARO〉～蒼哭ノ魔竜～, Garo Sōkoku no Maryū; lit. "Garo: Demon Dragon of the Blue Cries") was released in Japanese theaters on February 23, 2013, serving as an epilogue to Makai Senki, depicting Kouga Saejima's journey to the Promised Ground to retrieve Gajari's body. Ryosei Konishi was initially the only confirmed member of the cast, but Ray Fujita, Shouma Yamamoto, Ozuno Nakamura, Yukijirō Hotaru, Hironobu Kageyama, and Hiroyuki Watanabe were later confirmed to appear in the film. Guest stars include Yuki Kubota as Kakashi, Anna Aoi as Meru, Tetsuya Yanagihara as Esaruto, and Keiko Matsuzaka as Judam.


Yami o Terasu Mono

A third TV series titled Garo: Yami o Terasu Mono (牙狼〈GARO〉～闇を照らす者～; lit. "Garo: The One Who Shines in the Darkness") was broadcast on TV Tokyo from April 5 to September 20, 2013. The series is set in the near future, and features an entirely new story with a new Garo named Ryuga Dougai venturing into the Horror-plagued Vol City. The series also presents a brand new main cast that includes Wataru Kuriyama, Tsunenori Aoki, Junya Ikeda and fashion model Miki Nanri.


Tougen no Fue

In March 2013, the Garo team announced a new film titled Garo Gaiden: Tougen no Fue (牙狼外伝 桃幻の笛, Garo Gaiden Tōgen no Fue; lit. "Garo Side Story: The Tougen Flute"), which was released in Japanese theaters on July 20 of that year. Set during the time of Soukoku no Maryu, Tougen no Fue follows Makai Priestesses Jabi and Rekka as they travel to the northern forests to protect the mystical and titular flute. Yasue Sato, Mary Matsuyama, Masahiro Kuranuki, and Kanji Tsuda reprise their roles from the franchise as Makai Priestess Jabi, Makai Priestess Rekka, Makai Priest Shiguto, and Makai Knight Kengi, respectively, also appearing in the film are Kumi Takiuchi and Miku Oono.


Zero: Black Blood

Zero: Black Blood (絶狼〈ZERO〉-BLACK BLOOD-) is a spin-off six-episode miniseries starring Ray Fujita as his character Rei Suzumura from the original TV series. Rounding out the cast are Riria Kojima as Yuna, Naoki Takeshi as Kain, and Thane Camus as Ring. Keita Amemiya serves as executive director, with Ryu Kaneda directing and Yasuko Kobayashi writing. It was broadcast on Family Gekijo in March 2014 and shown in Japanese theaters in a limited release. JAM Project performed the opening theme "ZERO-BLACK BLOOD-" and Fujita's band Dustz performs the ending "S#0 (Scene Number Zero)" (S#0(シーンナンバーゼロ), Shīn Nanbā Zero).


Makai no Hana

A fourth Garo television series titled Garo: Makai no Hana (牙狼〈GARO〉-魔戒ノ花-; lit. "Garo: The Makai Flower") was broadcast on TV Tokyo from April 4 to September 26, 2014, and takes place between Makai Senki and Yami o Terasu Mono. With the exception of Yukijiro Hotaru reprising his portrayal of Gonza, it features a new cast consisting of Masei Nakayama as Raiga Saejima, the son of Kouga and Kaoru who inherited his father's title as the Golden Knight Garo, Atomu Mizuishi as Crow the Phantom Knight, and Natsumi Ishibashi as Mayuri, a mysterious tool with mystical powers that takes the form of a young woman.


Anime series

An anime adaptation of Garo was released in October 2014, titled in Japan as Garo: Honō no Kokuin (牙狼〈GARO〉-炎の刻印-; lit. "Garo: The Carved Seal of Flames"). It is produced by Studio MAPPA and directed by Yuichiro Hayashi. Taking place in the fictional country of Valiante in the Middle Ages, head writer Yasuko Kobayashi explained that, with the exception of Zaruba, it is unrelated to any characters or stories in the rest of the Garo continuity, though still exists as part of the larger universe's timeline. The series has been licensed by Funimation as Garo: The Animation, making it the first Garo installment to see a North American release.
A second series titled Garo: Guren no Tsuki (牙狼〈GARO〉-紅蓮ノ月-; lit. "Garo: The Crimson Moon"), taking place in Japan's Heian period, was announced for a 2015 release, alongside a film sequel of the first series titled Garo: Divine Flame, to coincide with the Garo tenth anniversary.
A film sequel of the first series titled Garo: Divine Flame (牙狼〈GARO〉-DIVINE FLAME-) was released in Japanese theaters on May 21, 2016.
A third series titled Garo: Vanishing Line (牙狼〈GARO〉-VANISHING LINE-) was broadcast on TV Tokyo from October 6, 2017, to March 30, 2018.
A film sequel of the second series titled Garo: The Fleeting Cherry Blossom (薄墨桜 -GARO-, Usuzumizakura -GARO-; lit. "Gray Cherry Blossoms: Garo") premiered in Japanese theaters on October 6, 2018.


Gold Storm Sho

Garo: Gold Storm Sho (牙狼〈GARO〉－GOLDSTORM－翔, Garo Gōrudo Sutōmu Shō; lit. "Garo: Gold Storm Flight") is both a film and a television series that serve as sequels to Yami o Terasu Mono. Wataru Kuriyama and Miki Nanri reprise their roles and are joined by new cast members, among them Masahiro Inoue as the series antagonist Jinga. The film adaptation was released in Japanese theatres on March 28, 2015, while the television series was broadcast on TV Tokyo from April 3 to September 18, 2015.


Bikuu
Bikuu (媚空－ビクウ－, Bikū) is a film starring Sayaka Akimoto reprising her role as Bikuu from Makai no Hana. It was released in Japanese theaters on November 14, 2015. Akimoto performs the ending theme "Sengetsu ~Hikari to Yami no Soba de~" (繊月～光と闇の傍で～; lit. "Crescent Moon ~Beside the Light and Darkness~").


Makai Retsuden

Garo: Makai Retsuden (牙狼〈GARO〉魔戒烈伝; lit. "Garo: History of Makai") is an omnibus television series which features the cast of the previous live action series. It celebrates the 10th anniversary of the Garo franchise and was broadcast on TV Tokyo from April 8 to June 24, 2016.


Ashura
Garo: Ashura (牙狼〈GARO〉-阿修羅-) is a special episode, with the Garo production team collaborating with New Japan Pro-Wrestling to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Garo franchise. It features Hiroshi Tanahashi as Gouki and Togi Makabe and was broadcast on TV Tokyo on July 1, 2016. Taking place between Makai Senki and Makai no Hana, Kaoru tells a young Raiga the story of one of the first Makai Knights to bear the Garo title: Gouki.


Zero: Dragon Blood

A brand new television series about Ray Fujita's character Rei Suzumura was originally announced as one of many new projects the Garo Project team were working on in 2015 and it was originally just known as Zero. In June 2016, it was announced that the series would be titled Zero: Dragon Blood (絶狼〈ZERO〉-DRAGON BLOOD-) to be broadcast in 2017. It was broadcast on TV Tokyo from January 6 to March 31, 2017.


Live stage shows
Garo: Kami no Kiba Mezame (牙狼〈GARO〉-神ノ牙 覚醒-; lit. "Garo: Fang of God - Awakening") features Masahiro Inoue's character Jinga and is connected to Garo: Kami no Kiba. It was held between November 29 to December 3, 2017, at Space Zero in Yoyogi.
Kami no Kiba: Jinga Tensei (神ノ牙 -JINGA- 転生; lit. "Fang of God: Jinga - Reincarnation") features Masahiro Inoue's character Jinga and is connected to Kami no Kiba: Jinga. It was held between January 5 to January 14, 2019, at The Galaxy Theatre in Higashishinagawa.


Kami no Kiba

Garo: Kami no Kiba (牙狼〈GARO〉-神ノ牙-; lit. "Garo: Fang of God") is a film of the series featuring Wataru Kuriyama's character Ryuga Dougai, along the main cast of Yami o Terasu Mono and Gold Storm Sho. It was released in Japanese theaters on January 6, 2018.


Kami no Kiba: Jinga

In November 2017, series creator Keita Amemiya announced plans for a spin-off television series, titled Kami no Kiba: Jinga (神ノ牙 -JINGA-, lit. "Fang of God: Jinga"), featuring Masahiro Inoue's character Jinga was in the works. In July 2018, it was announced that the series is scheduled to be broadcast in October of that year. It was broadcast on Tokyo MX from October 4 to December 27, 2018.


Gekkou no Tabibito
Garo: Gekkou no Tabibito (牙狼〈GARO〉-月虹ノ旅人-, Garo Gekkō no Tabibito; lit. "Garo: Moonbow Traveler") is a film that stars Masei Nakayama as Raiga Saejima serving as a sequel to the Makai no Hana television series, also including Hiroki Konishi who reprise his role as the original protagonist Kouga Saejima. After the production announcement in November 2014, it was announced in November 2018 that the film is scheduled to be released in theaters in 2019. It was released in Japanese theaters on October 4, 2019.
A three part mini series, P Garo: Saejima Kouga was streamed on YouTube prior to the release of the film.


Versus Road
Garo: Versus Road is a television series, which celebrates the 15th anniversary of the Garo franchise that premiered on Tokyo MX on April 2, 2020. It features a brand new cast that includes Koya Matsudai, Yuhi, Tokito, Toman, Naoya Shimizu, and Shutaro Kadoshita. This series is set in a different continuity from those of previous entries in the franchise.


Hagane o Tsugu Mono
Garo: Hagane o Tsugu Mono (牙狼〈GARO〉ハガネを継ぐ者; lit. "Garo: Heir to Hagane") is a television series that premiered on Tokyo MX and BS Nittele on January 11, 2024, featuring Wataru Kuriyama's character Ryuga Dougai.


Taiga
Garo: Taiga (牙狼〈GARO〉TAIGA) is a film that celebrates the 20th anniversary of the Garo franchise and features a younger version of Hiroyuki Watanabe's character Taiga Saejima. It was released in Japanese theaters on October 17, 2025.


Higashi no Kairou
Garo: Higashi no Kairou (牙狼〈GARO〉東ノ界楼, Garo Higashi no Kairō; lit. "Garo: Kairou of the East") is a television series that premiered on Tokyo MX and BS Nittele on January 29, 2026, featuring Wataru Kuriyama's character Ryuga Dougai.


Notes


References


External links
GARO at TV Tokyo (in Japanese)
GARO PROJECT (in Japanese)
GARO's channel on YouTube

Gaston Chiquet is a producer of grower champagne and an original member of Club Trésors de Champagne. 
The house has 23 hectares in Hautvillers, Dizy, Aÿ, Mareuil-sur-Aÿ, Crugny and Nanteuil-la-Forêt planted to 46% Chardonnay, 20% Pinot noir and 34% Pinot Meunier. 


References

Gephyronic acid is a polyketide that exists as an equilibrating mixture  of structural isomers. In nature, gephyronic acid is produced by slow growing myxobacterium: Archangium gephyra strain Ar3895 and Cystobacter violaceus strain Cb vi76. It is the first antibiotic in myxobacteria that was reported to specifically inhibit eukaryotic protein synthesis.


Biological properties
Preliminary studies demonstrated that gephyronic acid inhibited growth of yeast and molds as well as elicited a cytostatic effect through the inhibition of eukaryotic protein synthesis in mammalian cell cultures. Feeding experiments done with radioactive precursors showed a drastic difference in incorporation of leucine by a human leukemic cell like K-562, but little difference in the incorporation of uridine and thymidine. This suggested that the primary target of gephyronic acid is protein synthesis. As such, it is a potential target for cancer chemotherapy. Gene expression profiling of human breast cancer cell lines is underway in an effort to further define the potential of gephyronic acid as a chemotherapeutic lead.
Screening of a library of compounds derived from myxobacteria found that gephyronic acid was the strongest inhibitor of processing bodies (P-bodies) assembly. P-bodies are discrete cytoplasmic mRNP granules that contain non-translating mRNA and protein from the mRNA decay pathway and from miRNA silencing machinery. Within P-bodies, mRNAs can be degraded, but components of P-bodies can rapidly cycle in and out to return to translation. The mechanism of P-body assembly inhibition by gephyronic acid has not been characterized, but initial studies suggest that the mode of action could be through stalling ribosomes on mRNA or by reflecting early steps of translation initiation, such as binding of ribosomal subunits or initiation factors.
The same study also found that gephyronic acid inhibits eIF2α-phosphorylation and formation of stress granules under stress conditions. Stress granules contain non-translating mRNAs and translation initiation factors, suggesting that they may form as a result of aggregation of mRNPs stalled during translation initiation. By monitoring immunofluresence of an established stress granules marker, it was found that stress granule formation was inhibited in the presence of gephyronic acid. Gephyronic acid may have a direct or indirect effect on translation initiation factor eIF2α, which would trap mRNA into nonfunctional initiation complexes, inhibiting both P-body and stress granule formation.


Biosynthesis
Sequencing of the PKS gene cluster in C. violaceus was conducted and confirmed to reveal five type I polyketide synthases and post-PKS tailoring enzymes with O-methyltransferase and cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. The overall structure correlates well with modular arrangement of PKS-encoded proteins, aside from some unexpected elements that are likely caused by inactive domains. Initial loading uses a GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT) domain instead of the typical AT domain.

Gephyronic acid contains a methyl ether at C-5 and a C-12/C-13 epoxide. These functional groups are incorporated by post-PKS tailoring enzymes. GphA is likely responsible for installation of the C-5 methyl ether. O-methyltransferases SpiB and SpiK used in spirangien biosynthesis exhibit the same SAM-binding motif as GphA.
GphK is a member of the cytochrome p450 superfamily and is suspected to carry out the epoxidation of the C12-C13 olefin. Such epoxidation in post-PKS modifications has been seen in epothilone biosynthesis by EpoK. In EpoK, the consensus mechanism of epoxidation by P450 involves the formation of a pi-complex between an oxoferryl pi-cation radical species (FeIV) and the olefin pi bond, followed by electron transfer, formation of the olefin pi-cation radical and finally epoxidation.
However, it is also possible that in addition to cytochrome p450, a FAD-dependent monoxygenase is also required to install the epoxide. This codependent process is seen in tirandamycin biosynthesis by TamL. Experiments to clarify the function of these enzymes in gephyronic acid biosynthesis are underway.


References

Ginger Pig is a butchery which used to raise livestock in the Vale of Pickering and North York Moors and retail the meat in its shops in London and supplies restaurants and other specialist butchers. It was founded by Tim Wilson in 2003.  A series of Ginger Pig cookbooks based upon their produce was released in 2013.


History

Tim Wilson came from a farming background but initially dealt in antiques and property development.  He acquired an old farm in Nottinghamshire and kept three saddleback pigs there to make good use of the pigsty.   When they were grown and slaughtered, he bought three gilt Tamworth sows, Milli, Molly and Mandy and a Tamworth boar named Dai Bando. These bred quickly and so he soon had an abundance of pork.  He learnt how to make sausages and, in 1998, his friend Anne Wilson started a stall at the Borough Market selling his sausages.  The stall was successful and became a permanent outlet. Chef Paul Hughes then joined the business, bringing expertise in charcuterie and, together, they opened a butcher's shop in the Marylebone district of London. The business continued to prosper and in 2012 had grown to three farms, five shops and a series of cookery books.


See also
List of butcher shops


Bibliography
Ginger Pig Meat Book - Fran Warde and Tim Wilson (Mitchell Beazley, 2011) ISBN 9781845335588
Ginger Pig Farmhouse Cookbook - Fran Warde and Tim Wilson (Mitchell Beazley, 2013) ISBN 9781845337247


References


External links
The Ginger Pig — official website

Ginkgo digitata is an extinct ginkgo species in the family Ginkgoaceae. It lived in Great Britain from the Aalenian to the Bathonian, in Queensland in the Callovian and in British Columbia in the Cenomanian.


References

Gisaburō Sugii (杉井ギサブロー or 杉井儀三郎, Sugii Gisaburō; born August 20, 1940) is a Japanese anime director and Nihonga artist. He is best known for his work as director of the Touch series, the movie adaptation of the Arashi no Yoru ni children's book series, and the movie Night on the Galactic Railroad. He is a member of the Directors Guild of Japan and the Japanese Animation Creators Association.


Career
Sugii decided to become an animator after watching the film Bambi. He joined Toei Animation at the age of 19 after taking an entrance exam in 1958. He worked as an in-betweener on Hakujaden, Legend of the White Serpent soon after joining the studio. After becoming disillusioned with Toei due to complaints about production staff being unable to propose projects, he quit in 1961 and joined Mushi Pro on hearing that Osamu Tezuka was going to make anime.
1961 featured an exodus of animators from Toei to Mushi Pro following crackdowns on a strike organised by the Toei animator union. Sugii joined Mushi Pro along with his close friends from Toei, Rintaro and Yusaku Sakamoto. At the time the studio was still under construction and animators worked from Tezuka's house. Sugii helped refine Tezuka's rough animation into proper keys on the Tetsuwan Atom (Astro Boy) pilot film. On the Atom TV anime, Sugii was part of the initial rotation of six episode directors, which included Sakamoto, Eiichi Yamamoto, Sugii, Motoaki Ishii, Shûji Konno and Tezuka himself.
In 1964, Sugii along with Atsushi Takagi, Osamu Dezaki, Seiji Okuda and others left Mushi Pro and established studio Art Fresh. Art Fresh handled outsourced episodes of Tetsuwan Atom.
In 1967, Sugii made his directorial debut with Mushi Pro's television series Adventures of the Monkey King (Goku no Daibôken). His last work at Mushi Pro would be 1973's Belladonna of Sadness, on which he worked as animation director.
After promoting Manga Nippon Mukashibanashi, Sugii decided to spend some time away from the anime industry, setting off to travel the country from the mid-1970s to the early 1980s before finally returning to helm Night on the Galactic Railroad. He noted, "I could make
Night on the Galactic Railroad precisely because I had traveled. My approach to
visual expression greatly expanded after these experiences." Sugii's approach to the film was to treat "characters and landscapes as equals", exploring the main character Giovanni's emotions through shifts in the environment. While the original novel provides next to no description of the main characters' appearances, Sugii decided to depict them as anthropomorphic cats, as a means of preserving author Kenji Miyazawa's descriptive ambiguity of the characters.


Awards and influence
Sugii received the 2018 Tokyo Anime Award Festival Achievement Award which honors "lifetime achievements in developing technical skills and cultivating new talent" and "invaluable contributions to the advancement of the animation industry on the whole".
Director Hiroyasu Ishida was his student at Kyoto Seika University.


Works
Listed chronologically.

Hakujaden, Legend of the White Serpent (1958, In-between animation)
Astro Boy (1963–1966, production, animation director, key animation)
New Treasure Island (1965, animation director)
Gokū no Daibōken (1967, supervising director)
Dororo (1969, supervising director)
Lupin III Pilot Film (1969, key animation)
A Thousand and One Nights (1969, key animation)
Kori no Kuni no Misuke (1970, production)
Dobutsumura no Shoboshi (1972, production)
Kanashimi no Belladonna (1973, animation director)
Tasukeai no Rekishi -Seimei Hoken no Hajimari- (1973, production)
Jack and the Beanstalk (1974, director)
Manga Nippon Mukashi Banashi (1975–1994, episode director, script)
Son Gokū Silk Road o Tobu!! (1982, character design, production coordination)
Nine (1983, director)
Nine 2: Sweetheart Declaration (1983, director)
Glass Mask (1984, chief director)
Nine 3: Final (1984, director)
Night on the Galactic Railroad (1985, director)
Touch (1985–1987, supervising director)
Touch: Sebangō no Nai Ace (1986, director, script)
Touch 2: Sayonara no Okurimono (1986, supervising director)
The Tale of Genji (1987, director)
Hiatari Ryōkō! (1987–1988, director)
Touch 3: Kimi ga Tōri Sugita Ato ni (1987, supervising director, script)
Hiatari Ryoko! Ka - su - mi: Yume no Naka ni Kimi ga Ita (1988, supervising director)
Sweet Spot (1991, director, script)
Nozomi Witches (1992–1993, director, script)
Street Fighter II: The Animated Movie (1994, director)
Soar High! Isami (1995–1996, supervising director)
Street Fighter II V (1995, director)
Lupin III: The Secret of Twilight Gemini (1996, director, screenplay)
Touch: Miss Lonely Yesterday (1998, supervising director)
Super Doll Licca-chan (1998–1999, director)
Super Doll Licca-chan: Licca-chan Zettai Zetsumei! Doll Knights no Kiseki (1999, director)
Hidamari no Ki (2000, director)
Captain Tsubasa: Road to 2002 (2001, supervising director)
Touch: Cross Road (2001, supervising director)
Hajime no Ippo: The Fighting! (2001, 2nd opening animation storyboards)
Toki Kono Chikyu (Hoshi) no Mirai o Mitsumete (2003, director)
Lament of the Lamb (2003, director)
Space Pirate Captain Herlock: The Endless Odyssey (2003, storyboards)
Phoenix (2004, TV series, script, storyboards)
Arashi no Yoru Ni (2005, screenplay, director)
Cinnamoroll: The Movie (2007, director)
Tetsuko no Tabi (2007, opening animation storyboards)
Tofu Kozo (2011, general director, screenplay)
The Life of Guskou Budori (2012, director, writer, storyboards)
Furusato meguri Nippon no Mukashibanashi (2017, supervisor)
Rinshi!! Ekoda chan (2019, episode 2 director)
MFINDA (TBA, director)


Books
Street Fighter II Movie Storyboard Collection (STREET FIGHTER II MOVIE ストリートファイター II 絵コンテ集). Movic, 1994. ISBN 978-4896011210.
Anime to Seimei to Hourou to (アニメと生命と放浪と 「アトム」「タッチ」「銀河鉄道の夜」を流れる表現の系譜). Wani Books, 2012. ISBN 978-4847060540.
Night on the Galactic Railroad Setting Collection (アニメーション 「宮沢賢治 銀河鉄道の夜」設定資料集 増補新装版). Fukkan.com, 2018. ISBN 978-4835456126.


See also
 Biography portal


References


External links
Gisaburō Sugii at IMDb
Gisaburō Sugii  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Japan Movie Database (in Japanese)
Group TAC (in Japanese)

A glume is part of the flower of grasses and sedges.
Glume may also refer to:

Johann Georg Glume (1679–176?), German artist
Friedrich Christian Glume (1714–1752), German artist
Glüme (musician) - an American musician active in the 2020s.


See also
Gluma

"Goin' Down Slow" or "Going Down Slow" is a blues song composed by American blues singer St. Louis Jimmy Oden.  It is considered a blues standard and "one of the most famous blues of all".
"Goin' Down Slow" has been recorded by many blues and other artists, including a noteworthy version by Howlin' Wolf with narration by Willie Dixon.  A rendition by Bobby Bland was a hit in both the Billboard Hot 100 and R&B charts.


Original song
"Goin' Down Slow" "is the lament of a high-roller who is dying":

The song is a moderately slow-tempo twelve-bar blues, notated in 44 or common time in the key of B.  Oden, as St. Louis Jimmy, recorded it in Chicago on November 11, 1941.  It was released as a single by Bluebird Records and featured Oden's vocal with accompaniment by Roosevelt Sykes on piano and Alfred Elkins on "imitation" bass.
"Goin' Down Slow" was Oden's most famous song and he later recorded several versions, including in 1955 for Parrot Records and in 1960 for Bluesville Records.  He and Sykes continued their musical partnership well into the 1960s.


Howlin' Wolf version
Howlin' Wolf recorded "Goin' Down Slow" for Chess Records in 1961.  Wolf (vocal and guitar) recorded the song as a Chicago blues, with Henry Gray (piano), Hubert Sumlin and Jimmy Rogers (guitars), Willie Dixon (bass), and Sam Lay (drums).  Dixon also provided a spoken narrative, alternating with Wolf's vocal passages:

It was released in 1961 as a single between his "Little Red Rooster" and "I Ain't Superstitious" releases and included on his second compilation album Howlin' Wolf a.k.a. Rocking Chair Album in 1962. Wolf re-recorded the song in 1970 during The London Howlin' Wolf Sessions with Eric Clapton (guitar), Klaus Voormann (bass), Ringo Starr (drums), and Jeffery Carp (harmonica), which released as a bonus track in 2003.


Recognition and legacy
In 2002, St. Louis Jimmy Oden's "Goin' Down Slow" was inducted into the Blues Foundation Hall of Fame in the "Classics of Blues Recordings – Singles or Album Tracks" category.
Writing for AllMusic, critic Bill Dahl notes "Few blues songs have stood the test of time as enduringly as 'Goin' Down Slow'."  In 1974, a rendition by Bobby Bland was released as a single and reached the Billboard charts, peaking at number 17 (R&B) and number 69 (Hot 100).


References

Golubaya Bay (69°58′S 9°50′E) is a bay in the southeast extremity of Kamenev Bight, along the ice shelf fringing the coast of Queen Maud Land, Antarctica. The bay was photographed from the air by the Sixth Norwegian Antarctic Expedition in 1958–59 and was mapped from these photos. It was also mapped in 1961 by the Soviet Antarctic Expedition who named it "Bukhta Golubaya" (azure bay).


References

 This article incorporates public domain material from "Golubaya Bay". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey.

The Gordon Payne Site, designated by the Smithsonian trinomial 31MR15, is a prehistoric archaeological site in northern Moore County, North Carolina.  Located on a terrace above the Deep River, it is a habitation site whose artifacts have yielded dates of 1060-1100 CE.  Large numbers of cultural remains were excavated in the 1970s and 1980s, that are consistent with the Pee Dee culture, whose center is believed to be the Town Creek Indian Mound, about 30 miles (48 km) away in Montgomery County.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1986.


See also
National Register of Historic Places listings in Moore County, North Carolina


References

The Government of Ontario (French: Gouvernement de l'Ontario), or more formally, His Majesty's Government of Ontario (French: Gouvernement de l’Ontario de Sa Majesté) is the subnational government in the Canadian province of Ontario responsible for the administration of matters within provincial jurisdiction, as assigned by the Constitution Act, 1867. 
Depending context, the term Government of Ontario in day-to-day communication usually refers specifically to one of the following:

The Executive Council of Ontario, more colloquially known as the Ontario cabinet, a group of political ministers of the Crown led by and appointed on the advice of the premier, drawn from the parliamentary caucus of the provincial political party commanding the confidence of and accountable to the Legislative Assembly of Ontario
The Ontario Public Service, the functional workforce of more than 60,000 non-partisan civil servants in various ministries and agencies responsible for the execution of the policy decisions of the cabinet and for the delivery of programs and services that of public interest.  The entire organization corporately brands itself as the Government of Ontario
Queen's Park, the moniker commonly used to refer to the Legislative Assembly of Ontario due to its location in said park. Members of the executive council are drawn from the elected members of this legislative body, and the premier must command the support of the majority of its elected members on an ongoing basis to remain in office.


Authority exercised in the name of the Crown

As a Westminster-style parliamentary democracy, the Ontario Government draws its formal legal authority from the constitutional construct of the Monarchy in Ontario, or the Crown in Right of Ontario, in which the institutions of government act under King Charles III, as the monarch of Canada is also the King in Right of Ontario. As a Commonwealth realm, the Canadian monarch is shared with 14 other independent countries within the Commonwealth of Nations. Within Canada, the monarch exercises power individually on behalf of the federal government, and each of the 10 provinces.
The powers of the Crown are vested in the monarch and are exercised in the name of the Lieutenant Governor of Ontario, who is appointed by the governor general, on the advice of the prime minister of Canada. Formally speaking, executive power is vested in the Crown and exercised "in-Council", meaning the premier and ministers forming the executive council advise the lieutenant governor in exercising the royal prerogative and granting royal assent. In reality, the lieutenant governor can be appropriately described as the ceremonial figure head of the government. The Constitution Act, 1867 requires executive power to be exercised only "by and with the Advice of the Executive Council" and Westminster convention dictates that the advice of the executive commanding the confidence of parliament, in this case the elected Legislative Assembly on Ontario, is binding on the crown. The lieutenant governor may only refuse advice if the executive or the premier does not clearly command such confidence, likely in a scenario of a constitutional crisis.


The executive government - premier and the executive council

The term Government of Ontario, in the context of the executive leadership of the provincial administration, refers to the Premier on Ontario, as determine through the electoral process, and the cabinet they select and head. Currently, the government is led by Progressive Conservative Premier Doug Ford, who received his first electoral mandate and assumed the Ontario premiership in June 2018, and was most recently reelected in February 2025.
The executive government, with electoral mandate, directs the non-partisan Ontario Public Service, a workforce of more than 60,000 that staffs the numerous provincial departments, agencies. and crown corporations and perform the day-to-day operation and activities of the Government of Ontario 


Premier

The premier of Ontario is the first minister of the Crown. The premier acts as the head of government for the province, chairs and selects the membership of the Cabinet, and advises the Crown on the exercise of executive power and much of the royal prerogative. As premiers hold office by virtue of their ability to command the confidence of the elected Legislative Assembly, they typically sit as a MPP and lead the largest party or a coalition in the Assembly. Once sworn in, the premier holds office until their resignation or removal by the lieutenant governor after either a motion of no confidence or defeat in a general election.


Cabinet membership
In Canada, the Cabinet (French: Conseil des ministres, lit. 'council of ministers') of provincial and territorial governments are known as an Executive Council (French: Conseil exécutif).

Doug Ford and his Cabinet were sworn in by Lieutenant Governor Elizabeth Dowdeswell on June 29, 2018, following the 2018 general election. Ford conducted six major cabinet shuffles (with substantial numbers of ministers changing roles) since 2018 and 7 minor adjustments (triggered by resignations and impacted small numbers of ministers). 


Crown corporations


Ontario Public Service
The Government of Ontario employs 63,000+ public servants in its non-partisan workforce called the Ontario Public Service (OPS). The OPS helps the government design and deliver policies and programs. The head of the OPS is the Secretary of Cabinet and each ministry in the OPS has a Deputy Minister. The OPS public servants work in areas like administration, communications, data analytics, finance, information technology, law, policy, program development, service delivery, science and research.
Over 80% of the OPS workforce is unionized, which includes the Ontario Public Service Employees Union and the Association of Management, Administrative and Professional Crown Employees of Ontario.
The Government of Ontario is not the same as Broader Public Sector (BPS) organizations. While both provide goods and services to Ontarians, BPS organizations receive funding from the Government of Ontario, but are not a part of the government themselves. BPS organizations are also subject to legislation and directives.
Public servants who are paid $100,000 or more are subject to the Public Sector Salary Disclosure Act. This list is colloquially known as the sunshine list.


ontario.ca


See also
Politics of Ontario
Lieutenant Governor of Ontario
Premier of Ontario
Legislative Assembly of Ontario
Executive Council of Ontario


Notes


References


Works cited
Brooks, Stephen (2007). Canadian Democracy: An Introduction (5 ed.). Don Mills: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-543103-2.
MacLeod, Kevin S. (2008), A Crown of Maples (PDF) (1 ed.), Ottawa: Queen's Printer for Canada, ISBN 978-0-662-46012-1, retrieved 21 June 2009


External links
Official website

Grömitz (German pronunciation: [ˈɡʁøːmɪts] ) is a municipality in the district of Ostholstein, in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. It is situated on the Bay of Lübeck, approximately 35 km northeast of Lübeck, and 23 km east of Eutin.
Grömitz is a settlement on the Baltic Sea. In fair weather one can see buildings on the about 15 kilometer distant shore.
The town name contains the Slavic root grom ("thunder") and means "a place of thunder".
The sei whale was described after a whale stranded near Grömitz in 1829.
There were three ligers in the local zoo, but the last one had to be put to rest in February 2008.


Notable people
Bernhard Ernst von Bülow (1815–1879), Danish and German statesman


References


External links

Website of Grömitz

"Guess What" is a song by American recording artist Syleena Johnson from her second studio album, Chapter 2: The Voice. Written and produced by R. Kelly, the song was released as the album's second single on August 20, 2002. It became Johnson's first number-one single as a lead artist in the US, peaking at number one on the Adult R&B Songs chart and staying there for four non-consecutive weeks.
An accompanying music video was directed by Fab Five Freddy. The video depicts Johnson's conflict with her unfaithful lover. A remix entitled "Guess What (Guess Again)" was released as a single and featured R. Kelly's vocals as well as production and writing.


Composition and production
R. Kelly wrote "Guess What" around the theme of infidelity. Like other R. Kelly-written songs, the song had a similar pattern of people complaining and expressing their unhappiness in relationships, with a threat of leaving the romance. The song was believed to have been written about Johnson's relationship with her then husband Marcus Betts. "God. Now, "Guess What", unfortunately, I think that was written about Marcus", Johnson explained to Jamie Foster Brown, the publisher of Sister 2 Sister magazine. "I ain't write it, though. I think because of the conversation I had with Robert [R. Kelly], he wrote it because of that."
"Guess What" is a funk-soul and R&B song, which is layered over a gospel beat that runs for three minutes and thirty-two seconds. According to Chuck Arnold for People, "Guess What" is a "gospel-tinged ballad". "Guess What" is written in the key of D-flat major and is set in common time with a moderate dance groove with 82 beats per minute (BPM).


Music video
The video opens with Syleena's phone ringing. She then picks up her cell phone and talks to her love interest (played by Ro Brooks, who also played as her love interest in her "I Am Your Woman" music video). While they are talking, Syleena tells him that she knows that he went out with a girl named Tonya the other night. She later hangs up the phone and walks away and sits on a couch right next to a fish tank. The song begins playing. Syleena sings while standing on the balcony of the staircase. Her lover then walks in, takes off his jacket and hangs it on the coat rack. He walks up to her and attempts to confront her but she then pauses him and they begin arguing. He then walks away to another room and closes the door. He is playing a video game on the couch as Syleena sits right next to him trying to talk to him. He then pulls out a magazine and reads it to ignore her. Eventually he walks away, grabs his jacket from the coat rack and opens the door, walking out. As he is walking out, he approaches Syleena's three friends as they both walk in, looking confused. They sit on the couch with her and start talking. Later, her love interest pulls up to their house. Syleena walks up to the door and opens it Her love interest walks up to the house only to see trash bags with his stuff in it in front of it and later leaves. Syleena opens the door for another man, smiles and hugs him. He later walks in and Syleena smirks as the video cuts to black.


Release and chart performance
"Guess What" was first released in the United States, where a promo-only 12-inch single was issued to radio airplay in May 2002. Officially released to retailers by August and radio in October 2002, the song debuted on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart. It spent 28 weeks on the chart, peaking at number twenty-nine. It initially entered the Bubbling Under Hot 100 at number nineteen on the chart, where it moved up to number four a few weeks later. "Guess What" fared better on some of Billboard's other charts, including number twenty-nine on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart and number one for four non-consecutive weeks on the Adult R&B Songs chart.


Other usages
The song was featured on Totally R&B, a 2003 album from the Totally Hits compilation album series that features popular R&B songs from various artists. "Guess What" was also included on Johnson's greatest hits album The Best of Syleena Johnson (2008).


Charts


References

Wade Hampton Sides (born 1962) is an American historian, author and journalist. He is the author of Hellhound on His Trail, Ghost Soldiers, Blood and Thunder, On Desperate Ground, and other bestselling works of narrative history and literary non-fiction.
Sides is editor-at-large for Outside magazine and has written for such periodicals as National Geographic, The Wall Street Journal, The New Yorker, Esquire, Men's Journal, The American Scholar, Smithsonian, and The Washington Post. His magazine work, collected in numerous published anthologies, has been twice nominated for National Magazine Awards for feature writing.


Early life
A native of Memphis, Tennessee, Sides attended PDS Memphis and Memphis University School, and graduated from Yale with a BA in history. In 2017, he was awarded an honorary doctorate in humane letters from Colorado College. Sides lives in Santa Fe, New Mexico, with his wife Anne Goodwin Sides, a journalist and former NPR editor.


Career
Sides is a past fellow of the Santa Fe Institute, Yaddo, the MacDowell Colony, and the Japan Society, and has been an Edwards Media Fellow at Stanford University.
He is a member of the Society of American Historians and serves on the boards of the Authors Guild and the Mayborn Literary Nonfiction Conference. Sides has guest-lectured at Columbia, Yale, Stanford, Caltech, the Autry National Center of the American West, the American Embassy in Manila, the National World War II Museum, the Chautauqua Institution, the Explorers Club, the Sun Valley Writers' Conference, and the Google campus, among other venues and institutions. He has appeared as a guest on such national broadcasts as the American Experience, the Today show, Book TV, the History Channel, Fresh Air, CNN, CBS Sunday Morning, The Colbert Report, and NPR's All Things Considered.


Books


Ghost Soldiers
Ghost Soldiers (Doubleday, 2001), a World War II narrative about the rescue of Bataan Death March survivors, has sold slightly over a million copies worldwide and has been translated into a dozen foreign languages. Erik Larson, author of The Devil in the White City, praised Ghost Soldiers as a "Great Escape for the Pacific Theater," and Esquire called it "the greatest World War II story never told." The book was the subject of documentaries on PBS and The History Channel, and was partially the basis for the 2005 Miramax film, The Great Raid (along with William Breuer's The Great Raid on Cabanatuan). Ghost Soldiers won the 2002 PEN USA Award for non-fiction and the Discover Award from Barnes & Noble. The book's success led Sides to create The Ghost Soldiers Endowment Fund, a non-profit foundation dedicated to preserving the memory of the sacrifices made by Bataan and Corregidor veterans by funding relevant archives, museums, and memorials.


Americana
Americana: Dispatches from the New Frontier is a 2004 collection of non-fiction essays. The book was published in paperback on April 13, 2004, through Doubleday.
The book consists of several essays that Sides wrote while traveling through the United States and examining American cultures during a period of 15 years. Sides pays specific attention to subcultures that would fall under the topic of "Americana".


Blood and Thunder
Blood and Thunder (Doubleday, 2006) focuses on the life and times of controversial frontiersman Kit Carson, and his role in the conquest of the American West. A critic for the Los Angeles Times described Blood and Thunder as "stunning, haunting, and lyrical," while The Washington Post called it "riveting, monumental...authoritative and masterfully told." Blood and Thunder was named one of the 10 Best Books of 2006 by Time magazine, and was selected as that year's best history title by the History Book Club and the Western Writers of America. Blood and Thunder was the subject of a major documentary on the PBS program American Experience and is currently under development for the screen.


Hellhound on His Trail
Hellhound on His Trail (Doubleday 2010) is about the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., and the largest manhunt in American history to capture James Earl Ray, who pleaded guilty in 1969 and served the rest of his life in prison. Sides, who is a native of Memphis, is the first historian to make use of a new digital archive in that city, called the B. Venson Hughes Collection, which contains more than 20,000 documents and photos, many of them rare or never before published. Sides' research forms much of the basis for PBS's documentary "Roads to Memphis", which originally aired May 3, 2010, on the award-winning program, American Experience.
Hellhound on His Trail reached #6 on The New York Times Best Seller list and was a finalist for the 2011 Edgar Awards as the year's best non-fiction mystery. Janet Maslin of The New York Times called the book "spellbinding...bold, dynamic, unusually vivid," while a reviewer in The New York Times Book Review suggested that Hellhound "may be the first book on King that owes less to Taylor Branch than Robert Ludlum."  Time magazine said Hellhound "unfolds like a mystery—one read not for the ending but for all the missteps and near misses along the way." Critic Laura Miller, writing on Salon.com, described Hellhound as a "meticulous yet driving account that is in essence a true-crime story and a splendid specimen of the genre." David Garrow, author of a Pulitzer-winning biography of King, wrote in The Washington Post that Hellhound was "a carefully constructed true-crime narrative" and "a memorable and persuasive portrait" that "makes a valuable contribution to the historical record."
Black Label Media will produce and direct a film adaption, with a spring 2018 target for start of production. The script will be adapted by Scott Cooper who will also direct the film.


In the Kingdom of Ice
In the Kingdom of Ice (2014, Doubleday) recounts the tragic true story of the first official American attempt on the North Pole, the voyage of the USS Jeannette led by Navy captain George DeLong in 1879. Key historical figures in the book include James Gordon Bennett, Jr., owner of the New York Herald newspaper and financier, and August Heinrich Petermann, a German cartographer whose theory helped spawn the polar expedition.
The book has been translated into French, German, Chinese, Polish, and Russian, among other languages. Mark Bowden, author of Black Hawk Down, called In the Kingdom of Ice "the most dramatic polar mission you've never heard of. Once you start, you won't stop." S.C. Gwynne, author of Empire of the Summer Moon called it "an Arctic thriller . . . an authentic narrative masterpiece." Efforts to locate the wreck of the USS Jeannette have been led by the Prince Albert II of Monaco Foundation, for which Sides has served as a consultant. In the Kingdom of Ice is reportedly being developed for the small screen by Emmy Award-winning screenwriter Kirk Ellis (John Adams).


On Desperate Ground
On Desperate Ground: The Marines at The Reservoir, the Korean War's Greatest Battle, was published on October 2, 2018. It is a multifaceted retelling of the Battle of Chosin Reservoir through the experiences of marines, commanders, pilots, Korean citizens and the Chinese. It also acts an indictment of the overweening hubris of General of the Army, Douglas MacArthur.  Through MacArthur's self-proclaimed expertise on the "Oriental mind" and what Sides referred to as MacArthur's "solemn regard for his own mind", MacArthur was thoroughly convinced of American victory; instead, and while completely ignoring the advice of leaders on the ground, MacArthur sent American troops into what could only result into a massacre. Historian Douglas Brinkley called the book "a heart-pounding, fiercely written . . . one of the finest battle books ever." A reviewer for Bloomberg, calling the book " superb," wrote that On Desperate Ground "should be required reading for negotiators on both sides of the DMZ." The Washington Post named On Desperate Ground one of the ten best books of 2018, and the Marine Corps Heritage Foundation named it the year's best non-fiction book.
Considerable parts of the narrative follow aviator Jesse L. Brown, who is also the subject of the 2022 film  Devotion.


The Wide Wide Sea
The Wide Wide Sea: Imperial Ambition, First Contact and the Fateful Final Voyage of Captain James Cook was published in 2024.


Selected journalism
The New York Times Book Review; "On Dead Wake: The Last Crossing of the Lusitania by Erik Larson".
National Geographic; "Science Seeks to Unlock Marijuana's Secret".
National Geographic; "Unseen Titanic".
National Geographic; "Russian Refuge".
National Geographic; "1,000 Days in the Ice".
Outside; "Tracing the Steps of Lost Explorers in Miserable, Beautiful Siberia".
Outside; "The Man Who Saw Too Much".
Outside; "Bear Grylls Plays Dirty".
Outside; "Anyone for a Dip?".
Outside; "The Birdman Drops In".
Outside; "Wake-Up Call".
Outside; "Quadzilla".
Outside; The Place Where Two Fell Off.
Men's Journal; "The First to Die".
Bicycling; "Life's Rich Pageant".
The Dallas Morning News; "Decades after assassinations, Memphis and Dallas remain hostages of history".
The American Scholar; "Frozen Assets".
Newsweek; "The Fall of Greg Mortensen and Our Longing for Heroes".
The New Yorker; "National Defense".
Garden & Gun; "City Portrait: Memphis, Tennessee".


Bibliography
Stomping Grounds: A Pilgrim's Progress Through Eight American Subcultures (1992)  ISBN 0-688-09049-4 OCLC 26216643
Ghost Soldiers: The Epic Account of World War II's Greatest Rescue Mission (2001) ISBN 0-385-49564-1 OCLC 45835493
Why Moths Hate Thomas Edison and Other Urgent Inquiries into the Odd Nature of Nature: The Best of Outside Magazine's "The Wild File" New York: Norton, 2001. ISBN 0-393-32150-9 OCLC 45715852
Americana: Dispatches from the New Frontier (2004)  ISBN 1-400-03355-1 OCLC 53289674
Blood and Thunder: An Epic of the American West (2006)  ISBN 0-385-50777-1 OCLC 70045754
Hellhound on His Trail: The Electrifying Account of the Largest Manhunt in American History. Doubleday, 2010. ISBN 0-385-52392-0 OCLC 458738471
In the Kingdom of Ice: The Grand and Terrible Polar Voyage of the USS Jeannette. Doubleday. 2014. ISBN 9780385535380. OCLC 883257804.
On Desperate Ground: The Marines at The Reservoir, the Korean War's Greatest Battle. Doubleday. 2018. ISBN 978-0385541152. OCLC 1099506789.
The Wide Wide Sea: Imperial Ambition, First Contact and the Fateful Final Voyage of Captain James Cook. Doubleday. 2024. ISBN 978-0385544764. OCLC 1416012934.


References


External links

Official website

Hampton Sides articles for Outside magazine
Doubleday website for Sides's history, Blood and Thunder
Website for Sides's anthology of journalism, Americana: Dispatches from the New Frontier
Interview at Outside magazine, 10-06
Interview on Blood and Thunder at the Pritzker Military Museum & Library
Appearances on C-SPAN

Harry Winston Jerome  (September 30, 1940 – December 7, 1982) was a Canadian track and field sprinter and physical education teacher. He won a bronze medal at the 1964 Olympics in Tokyo and set a total of seven world records over the course of his career.


Early life
Harry Jerome was born in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, the son of Harry Vincent Jerome and Elsie Ellen Howard, and moved to North Vancouver, British Columbia, at age 12. His grandfather was John Howard, an American-born railway porter who represented Canada in the 1912 Summer Olympics.  Harry's sister, Valerie Jerome, was also an Olympian who competed for Canada at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome.


Athletic career
Jerome competed at the university level for Bill Bowerman at the University of Oregon. He was a member of the Canadian track and field team at the 1960, 1964, and 1968 Summer Olympics, winning 100 metre bronze in 1964. Jerome wore his University of Oregon sweats, rather than the contemporary practice of an official national outfit for all Olympic appearances, to warm up for the Olympic 100 metres in Tokyo. He won the gold at the 1966 British Empire and Commonwealth Games held in Kingston, Jamaica.
During his career, Jerome set a total of seven world records, including tying the 100 metre record at 10.0 seconds in 1960, equalling the mark established a month earlier by Germany's Armin Hary. Later he tied the world record for the 100 yard dash at 9.3 seconds (1961), making Jerome one of the few athletes to own both the 100 yard and 100 metre world record simultaneously. Jerome was a member of the University of Oregon 4 × 100 m relay team that tied the world record of 40.0 seconds in 1962; during the 1962 season, Harry ran 9.2s at the 100 yard dash 2 times. In 1966 he again tied a world record with a 9.1 time in the 100 yard. From 1963 to 1966 he held or equalled four world records concurrently.
He remains the only man to have held the 100 yard world record with 3 different times and is the oldest 100y world record holder, at 25 years old. Jerome never owned the 100y or 100m WR solely but matched his contemporaries.
Jerome won the British AAA Championships title at the 1961 AAA Championships.
Jerome continued to sprint successfully until the late 1960s, despite suffering an injury so severe at the Perth Commonwealth Games in 1962 that doctors initially believed he would be crippled for life.


Teaching and post-athletic career
Jerome received a bachelor's degree in physical education from the University of Oregon in 1964 and taught with the Richmond School Board (1964–65) and then with the Vancouver School Board (1965–68). In 1968, he received a master's in physical education from Oregon.
After retiring from athletics in 1969, Jerome was invited by Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau to help create Canada's new Ministry of Sport. Jerome held a number of senior positions in the ministry but resigned over the government's cancellation of a large public-private partnership he had negotiated with Kellogg's to promote youth participation in athletics. During the 1980s, Jerome headed the Premier's Sport Award program in British Columbia.
Jerome died of a brain aneurysm on December 7, 1982, at the age of 42, in North Vancouver.


Honours and tributes

In 1970, Jerome was made an Officer of the Order of Canada. The following year he was inducted into Canada's Sports Hall of Fame. Jerome was posthumously inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame in 2001 and was named a Person of National Historical Significance in 2010.
In 1984, the Labatts International Track Classic Pre-Olympic meet was renamed the Harry Jerome International Track Classic. The meet is held annually at Swangard Stadium in Burnaby, British Columbia. The Harry Jerome Sports Complex in North Vancouver, one block from North Vancouver High School where he first went out for track in 1958, and the Harry Jerome Sports Centre, home to the Burnaby Velodrome, are named after Jerome, as are the weight room at the University of Oregon and the track and field stadium in Prince Albert.  The Stanley Park sea wall in Vancouver is graced with a 2.7-metre (9 ft) bronze statue of Jerome.
The annual Harry Jerome Awards, the national awards dinner for Canada's black community organized by the Black Business and Professionals Association (BBPA), is named after him.
Another meet, called the Harry Jerome Indoor Games was created in 2011. It is held at the Richmond Olympic Oval, once used for Speed Skating events at the 2010 Vancouver Olympics, but now a multi-purpose sports facility. The meet is mainly attended by high school students representing lower mainland clubs, as well as some university student-athletes, and younger athletes.
On September 30, 2019, Google celebrated Harry Jerome's 79th birthday with a Google Doodle.
The Harry Jerome Community Recreation Centre in North Vancouver, British Columbia is scheduled to open in July 2026.


Works about Jerome
Production began in April 2009 on a feature-length biographical documentary entitled Mighty Jerome. Directed by Charles Officer and produced by the National Film Board of Canada (NFB) in Vancouver, the film was inspired by Fil Fraser’s book on Jerome, entitled Running Uphill.
NFB producer Selwyn Jacob had approached Officer — along with four other directors — in 2007 with idea of making a documentary about Jerome. Officer's proposal was selected by Jacob and the NFB, despite the fact that he had never directed a documentary before.  The black and white film uses archival footage, interviews and dramatizations to explore Jerome's life and career. Officer recreated museum installations in Toronto, Edmonton and Vancouver to interview Jerome's contemporaries and family members. Jerome's sister Valerie refused to participate in the film due to objections over his portrayal in Fraser's book. The film premiered at the Vancouver International Film Festival on October 8, 2010.
Jerome's 100 metre bronze medal performance at the Tokyo 1964 Summer Olympics is captured in the documentary film Tokyo Olympiad (1965) directed by Kon Ichikawa. Slow-motion close-up footage of Jerome (along with other athletes) preparing for the race begins at the 26 minute mark and then the race is shown in its entirety at full speed.


Achievements
1960 world record 100 m: 10.0 (tied record of Armin Hary)
1960 Summer Olympics 100 m Canadian team member
1961 world record 100 yds: 9.3
1962 world record 100 yds: 9.2
1962 world record 440 yds: 40.0 University of Oregon team member
1963 world record 60 yds indoor: 6.0
1964 Summer Olympics 100 m: 3rd 10.2 / 200 m: 4th 20.7
1966 world record 100 yds: 9.1
1966 Canadian record 220 yds: 20.4
1966 Commonwealth Games 100 yds: 1st 9.4
1967 Pan American Games 100m: 1st 10.2
1968 Summer Olympics 100 m: 7th 10.2


References

"Harry Winston Jerome". Canada's Walk of Fame. Archived from the original on August 26, 2006. Retrieved July 13, 2006.


External links
Harry Jerome International Track Classic
Mighty Jerome at the National Film Board of Canada (Requires Adobe Flash)
Harry Jerome at Find a Grave
University of Oregon [1]
Records of Harry and Valerie Jerome are held by Simon Fraser University's Special Collections and Rare Books Archived February 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine
Tokyo Olympiad at Criterion.com
Walk of Fame Simcoe Street  (ontario)

Heerup is a Danish surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Henry Heerup (1907–1993), Danish painter, graphic artist, and sculptor
Hjalmar Heerup (1886–1961), Danish footballer
Ole Heerup (1934–2016), Danish visual artist
Gunnar Heerup (1903–1989), Danish music educator and music researcher
Malene Heerup (born 1964), Danish visual artist

Hela Yungst Hochman (January 15, 1950 - February 24, 2002), also known as Hela Young, was an American television entertainer and beauty pageant winner. She was a promoter of Holocaust awareness and a former president of the New Jersey Commission on Holocaust Education.
Yungst was born in Tel Aviv, Israel, to Eva (née Faiman) and Henry; both were survivors of The Holocaust. The family moved to the Newark, New Jersey area about 1956. She was raised in Hillside, New Jersey and graduated from Hillside High School in 1967, where she was a member of the National Honor Society. She completed a BA (music education and theatre) at Newark State College (now Kean University).
Yungst was Miss New Jersey 1970, representing the state in the Miss America 1971 pageant in Atlantic City. The Women's Liberation Front demonstrated at the event. Yungst was not a finalist, however, losing to Miss Texas 1970, Phyllis George. In August 1971, Yungst traveled to Vietnam with George; Miss Nevada 1970, Vicky Jo Todd; Miss New Jersey 1970, Cheryl Browne; Miss Iowa 1970, Karen Shields; Miss Arkansas 1970, Donna Connelly; and Miss Texas 1970 (George's replacement), Belinda Myrick. They participated in a 22-day USO tour for American troops there. The tour began in Saigon. Browne later commented that she thought "it was one of the last Miss America groups to go to Vietnam."
Yungst was a performer on stage and in films, television commercials and soap operas, appearing in Guiding Light and All My Children. She changed her name to Hela Young and became the New Jersey Lottery hostess in January 1977 on NJN drawing the nightly winning numbers. She left television in November 2001 due to illness.
She resided with her husband and daughter in Mountainside, New Jersey and died in 2002 due to cancer.
The New Jersey Commission on Holocaust Education presents "The Hela Young Award" each year "to honor a person in recognition of outstanding work in the community for the improvement of human relations among diverse peoples and for the improvement of the human condition."


References


External links
A Tribute to Hela Young - NJN Behind the Scenes, March, 2002

Henry Harrison Culver (August 9, 1840 – September 27, 1897) was an American businessman and philanthropist. He is best known for founding the Culver Academies.


Early life
Henry Harrison Culver was born near London, Ohio on August 9, 1840.


Career
Culver started a cooking range company with two of his brothers, Walter and Licius, which they incorporated in 1881 as the Wrought Iron Range Company in St. Louis. The company was very successful and Culver amassed a substantial fortune. After becoming ill, he retired in 1883 to the north shore of Lake Maxinkuckee, close to his wife's childhood home.


Philanthropy
In 1894, Culver founded a college preparatory school on his property near Lake Maxinkuckee. It was modelled after West Point. It is now known as Culver Academies.


Personal life and death
Culver married Emily Hand. They had five sons and one daughter. He died on September 27, 1897.


References

Henry Snowden Ward (27 February 1865 – 7 December 1911) was an English photographer and author. Often in collaboration with his wife, the photographer Catharine Weed Barnes, he produced periodicals and textbooks about photography and produced illustrated works of literature.


Early life
Ward was born at Great Horton, Bradford, in 1865, eldest of five sons of William Ward, stuff manufacturer, and his wife Mary, only daughter of Henry Snowden, manufacturer. He was educated at Bradford Grammar School and at Bradford Technical College, and entered in 1880 his father's business.
With Herbert James Riley he established the periodical The Practical Naturalist (afterwards amalgamated with The Naturalist's World), and founded the Practical Naturalists' Society. In 1885 he joined the printing and publishing firm Percy Lund & Co. of Bradford, for whom in 1890 he founded and edited the monthly periodical, the Practical Photographer. He soon became a recognised authority on photography and kindred technical subjects.


In America
Ward left Bradford for London in 1891 and paid his first visit to America in 1892. In America, he married on 15 July 1893 Catharine Weed Barnes, daughter of William Barnes of Albany, New York, and granddaughter of Thurlow Weed, a prominent New York journalist and politician.
After returning to England they lived for many years at Golden Green, Hadlow, Kent.


Publications


Periodicals and technical works

He and his wife, an accomplished photographer, edited in London The Photogram (1894–1905), continued from 1906 as The Photographic Monthly; The Process Photogram (1895–1905), continued from 1906 as The Process Engravers' Monthly; also Photograms of the Year (from 1896) and The Photographic Annual (from 1908).
He also compiled many technical handbooks, of which the chief were Practical Radiography, the first handbook in English on X-rays, then known as Röntgen rays (with A. W. Isenthal, 1896; new editions in 1897, 1898, and 1901); The Figures, Facts, and Formulæ of Photography (3 editions, 1903); Photography for the Press (1905; 3rd edition 1909); and Finishing the Negative (1907). For the photographic firm of Dawbarn & Ward (in existence from 1894 to 1911), of which he was a joint director, he edited the Useful Arts Series (1899), the Home Workers' Series, and Rural Handbooks (1902).


Literature
Literature and topography also attracted Ward, and he and his wife wrote and copiously illustrated with photographs taken by themselves: Shakespeare's Town and Times (quarto, 1896; 3rd enlarged edit. 1908); The Shakespearean Guide to Stratford-on-Avon (1897); The Real Dickens Land (quarto, 1903); and The Canterbury Pilgrimages (1904). Ward also edited, with notes and introduction, an edition, elaborately illustrated by his wife, of R. D. Blackmore's Lorna Doone in 1908.


Societies, travels and death
He became a member of the Royal Photographic Society in 1892 and a fellow in 1895. He was one of the first members in 1897 of the Röntgen Society, and was president in July 1909 of the Canterbury meeting of the Photographic Convention of the United Kingdom, founded in 1886 to promote photographic research.
Ward was an ardent traveller and made many lecturing tours in Great Britain, Canada, and the United States. His topics were both technical and literary. An enthusiastic admirer of Dickens, he was an original member of the Dickens Fellowship, was chairman of council (1907–8), and was mainly responsible for the acquisition for the Guildhall Library of Frederick George Kitton's collection of Dickensiana in 1908.
As commissioner of the Dickens Fellowship, he went in October 1911 to America on a six months' lecture tour to stimulate American interest in the Dickens centenary; but he died suddenly in New York from mastoiditis-meningitis on 7 December 1911, and was buried at Albany, New York.


References

Attribution

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Owen, William Benjamin (1912). "Ward, Henry Snowden". In Lee, Sidney (ed.). Dictionary of National Biography (2nd supplement). Vol. 3. London: Smith, Elder & Co. p. 591.


External links
Henry Snowden Ward Historic Camera

The Henry "Harry" Charles Pernot House is a historic house at 119 Fayetteville Road in Van Buren, Arkansas.  Built in the early 20th century, it is an eclectic and late example of blended Queen Anne and Second Empire architecture.  It has asymmetrical massing and a tower, characteristic of the Second Empire, along with a Queen Anne porch that features turned posts and a spindled valance.  Harry Pernot, who built it, was mayor of Van Buren, 1904–1909.
The house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2017.


See also
National Register of Historic Places listings in Crawford County, Arkansas


References

Here Where There Is Love is Dionne Warwick's sixth studio album for Scepter Records, and was released on December 4, 1966. The album was recorded at Bell Sound Studios in New York City and was produced in full by Burt Bacharach and Hal David with Bacharach also arranging and conducting.


History
It was Warwick's first Scepter album to make the top 40, climbing to No. 18 on  Billboard's Top LP's chart, and also her first album to be RIAA-certified gold in America, signifying sales of more than 500,000 copies.  It also hit No. 1 on Billboard's R&B albums chart.  The album's cover art features a photograph of a sunset with two anonymous lovers on a beach.
Two of Warwick's hit singles from 1966 were included on the album: her top 20 covers of Bacharach and David's "Trains and Boats and Planes" and "I Just Don't Know What to Do with Myself". Warwick's version of "Alfie", which she performed at the 1967 Academy Awards, became a bigger top 40 hit than any of the 40-plus versions that had previously been recorded, peaking at No. 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart in the summer of 1967 during a 17-week chart run. It also reached No. 5 on Billboard's R&B singles chart.
Other songs of note are the Bacharach and David-penned title track; Warwick's reading of "What The World Needs Now Is Love"; Charles Trenet's "I Wish You Love"; and a cover of Bob Dylan's "Blowin' in the Wind".


Track listing


Charts


Certifications and sales


See also
List of Billboard number-one R&B albums of the 1960s


References


External links
Here Where There Is Love at Discogs (list of releases)

The history of the Assyrians encompasses nearly five millennia, covering the history of the ancient Mesopotamian civilization of Assyria, including its territory, culture and people, as well as the later history of the Assyrian people after the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire in 609 BC. For purposes of historiography, ancient Assyrian history is often divided by modern researchers, based on political events and gradual changes in language, into the Early Assyrian (c. 2600–2025 BC), Old Assyrian (c. 2025–1364 BC), Middle Assyrian (c. 1363–912 BC), Neo-Assyrian (911–609 BC) and post-imperial (609 BC–c. AD 240) periods, Sassanid era Asoristan from 240 AD until 637 AD and the post Islamic Conquest period until the present day.
Assyria gets its name from the ancient city of Assur, founded c. 2600 BC. During much of its early history, Assur was dominated by foreign states and polities from southern Mesopotamia, for instance falling under the hegemony of the Sumerian city of Kish, being incorporated into the ethnically same  Akkadian Empire and falling under the rule of the Third Dynasty of Ur. The city and its surrounds became an independent city-state under its own line of rulers during the collapse of the Third Dynasty of Ur, achieving independence under Puzur-Ashur I c. 2025 BC. Puzur-Ashur's dynasty continued to govern Assur which became a regional power with colonies in Anatolia and influence over South Mesopotamia until the throne was usurped by the Amorite conqueror Shamshi-Adad I c. 1808 BC. This period is sometimes known as the Old Assyrian Empire and latterly the 'Empire of Shamshi Adad'. After a few decades of Babylonian domination in the mid 18th century BC, Assyria was restored as an independent state, perhaps by the king Puzur-Sin or his successor Adasi, both of whom defeated the Babylonians and Amorites. In the 15th century BC, Assyria briefly fell under the suzerainty of the Mitanni kingdom. After wars between Mitanni and the Hittites, Assur broke free, and under Ashur-uballit I (r. c. 1363–1328 BC) destroyed the Hurri-Mitanni Empire and annexed much of the territory of the Hittite Empire and transitioned  to a powerful territorial state governing an increasingly large stretch of territory in Mesopotamia,  Anatolia and the Levant, forming  the Middle Assyrian Empire.
Under the 14th and  13th-century BC warrior-kings Adad-nirari I, Shalmaneser I and Tukulti-Ninurta I, the Middle Assyrian Empire became one of the great powers of the ancient Near East, for a time even occupying Babylonia in the south. After the death of  Ashur-bel-kala in 1056 BC, Assyria experienced a long period of decline, sometimes interrupted by energetic warrior-kings, which restricted Assyria to little more than the Assyrian heartland and surrounding territories, though Assyrian military prowess remained the best in the world. New efforts by the Assyrian kings of the 10th and 9th centuries BC reversed this decline and saw a renewed period of expansion. Under Ashurnasirpal II in the early 9th century BC, Assyria (now the Neo-Assyrian Empire) once more became the dominant political and military power of the Near East. Assyrian expansionism and power reached its peak under Tiglath-Pileser III in the 8th century BC and the subsequent Sargonid dynasty of kings, under whom the Neo-Assyrian Empire stretched from Egypt, Libya and Arabian Peninsula the south to the Caucasus in the north, and  Persia  in the east to Cyprus in the west . Babylonia was recaptured and Assyrian campaigns were conducted into both Anatolia and modern-day Armenia. The empire, and Assyria as a state, came to an end in the late 7th century BC as a result of the Medo-Babylonian conquest of the Assyrian Empire after a draining civil war among rival claimants to the Assyrian throne had gravely weakened it.
After the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the Assyrian people continued to survive northern Mesopotamia and southeastern Anatolia and Assyrian cultural traditions were kept alive. Though the Babylonians and Medes had extensively devastated Assyrian cities, the region was soon significantly rebuilt and revived under the rule of the Achaemenid Empire, Seleucid and Parthian empires, from the 4th century BC to the 3rd century AD. Assur itself flourished in the late post-imperial period, perhaps once more under its own line of rulers as a semi-autonomous city-state.  During the Parthian Empire a number of Neo Assyrian states emerged from the 2nd century BC to mid 3rd century AD, including Assur, Adiabene, Osroene, Beth Nuhadra, Beth Garmai and the partly Assyrian  Hatra. However these states were conquered by the Sasanian Empire c. AD 240. Starting from the 1st century AD onwards, the Assyrians were Christianized, though holdouts of the old ancient Mesopotamian religion continued to survive for many centuries, into the Late Middle Ages in some regions. The Assyrians continued to constitute a significant if not majority  portion of the population in northern Mesopotamia, Northeast Syria and Southeast Anatolia until suppression and massacres under the Ilkhanate and the Timurid Empire in the 14th century. These atrocities relegated the Assyrians to a local indigenous ethnic, linguistic and religious minority. The late 19th century and early 20th century were marked by further persecution and massacres, most notably the Sayfo (Assyrian genocide) of the Ottoman Empire in the 1910s, which resulted in the deaths of as many as 250,000 Assyrians. This time of atrocities was also marked by an increasing Assyrian cultural consciousness; the first Assyrian newspaper, Zahrirē d-Bahra ("Rays of Light"), began publishing in 1848 and the earliest Assyrian political party, the Assyrian Socialist Party, was founded in 1917. Throughout the 20th century and still today, many unsuccessful proposals have been made by the Assyrians for autonomy or independence. Further massacres and persecutions, enacted both by governments and by terrorist groups such as the Islamic State have resulted in most of the Assyrian people living in diaspora.


Ancient Assyria (2600 BC–AD 240)


Early Assyrian period (2600–2025 BC)

Agricultural villages in the region that would later become Assyria are known to have existed by the time of the Hassuna culture, c. 6300–5800 BC. Though the sites of some nearby cities that would later be incorporated into the Assyrian heartland, such as Nineveh, are known to have been inhabited since the Neolithic, the earliest archaeological evidence from Assur dates to the Early Dynastic Period, c. 2600 BC, a time in which the surrounding region was already relatively urbanized. It is possible that the city was founded earlier; much of the early historical remains of Assur may have been destroyed during the extensive construction projects of later Assyrian kings, who worked to create level foundations for the buildings they erected in the city. There is no evidence that early Assur was an independent settlement, and it might not have been called Assur at all initially, but rather Baltil or Baltila, used in later times to refer to the city's oldest portion. The name "Assur" is first attested for the site in documents of the Akkadian period in the 24th century BC.
Early Assur was probably a local religious and tribal center and must have been a town of some size since it had monumental temples. It was located in a highly strategic location, on a hill overlooking the Tigris river, protected by a river on one side and a canal on another. Surviving archaeological and literary evidence has been suggested by some historians that Assur in its earliest history may have been inhabited by Hurrians as well as Semitic ancestors of the Assyrians, although others reject this hypothesis.  Assur was the site of a fertility cult devoted to the Assyrian-Akkadian goddess Ishtar. The earliest known archaeological finds at the site are Early Dynastic-age temples dedicated to Ishtar. These temples and the artifacts within them also show considerable similarities to temples and artifacts from Sumer in southern Mesopotamia, which might suggest that there was also a group of Sumerians living in the city, that it at some point was conquered by an unknown Sumerian ruler or simply be an example of the melding of Sumerian and Akkadian speaking culture in Mesopotamia. The East Semitic-speaking ancestors of the later Assyrians settled in Mesopotamia at some point during the 35th and 31st century BC, either assimilating or displacing the previous population. The earliest Assyrian king named Tudia appears to have lived in the mid 25th century BC.
During much of the early Assyrian period, Assur was dominated by states and polities from southern Mesopotamia. Early on, Assur for a time fell under the loose hegemony of the Sumerian city of Kish and it was later occupied by both the Akkadian Empire and then the Third Dynasty of Ur. The Akkadian Empire probably conquered Assur in the time of its first ruler, Sargon (c. 2334–2279 BC), and is known to have controlled the city at least from the reign of Manishtushu (c. 2270–2255 BC) onwards since contemporary inscriptions dedicated to Manishtushu have been recovered from the city. The earliest historically attested rulers of Assur were local governors under the Akkadian kings, including figures such as Ititi and Azazu, who bore the title Išši'ak Aššur (governor of Assur). Assur was strongly influenced both culturally and linguistically by the period under Akkadian rule (the Akkadians and Assyrians being ethno-linguistically the same people) and the period would be regarded as a golden age by later Assyrian kings, who often sought to emulate the Akkadian rulers who they viewed as their ancestors.
Assur was largely destroyed in the late Akkadian period, possibly by the Lullubi, but was rebuilt and later conquered by the Sumerian Third Dynasty of Ur in the late 22nd or early 21st century BC. Under the rulers of Ur, Assur became a peripheral city state under its own governors, such as Zariqum, who paid tribute to the southern kings. This period of Sumerian dominance over the city came to an end as the last king of the Third Dynasty of Ur, Ibbi-Sin (c. 2028–2004 BC) lost his administrative grip on the peripheral regions of his empire and Assur became an independent city-state controlling areas of northern Mesopotamia under its own rulers, beginning with Puzur-Ashur I c. 2025 BC, although it appears kings such as Ushpia c. 2080 BC were also independent.


Old Assyrian period (2025–1364 BC)

Puzur-Ashur I and the succeeding kings of his dynasty, the Puzur-Ashur dynasty, did not technically claim the dignity of "king" (šar) for themselves, but continued to use the style rulers of Assur had used while the city was under foreign rule, Išši'ak ("governor"). The use of this style asserted that the actual king of the city was the Assyrian national deity Ashur and that the Assyrian ruler was merely his representative on Earth. It is probable that Ashur took form as a deity at some point during the Early Assyrian period as a personification of the city of Assur itself. During the rule of the Puzur-Ashur dynasty, Assur was home to less than 10,000 people and the military power of the city is likely to have been limited to local regions; no sources describe any military conquests whatsoever and no surrounding cities appear to have been subjected to the rule of the Assyrian kings. The earliest known surviving inscription by an Assyrian king was written by Puzur-Ashur I's son and successor Shalim-ahum, and records the king having built a temple dedicated to Ashur "for his own life and the life of his city". The fourth king of the dynasty, Erishum I (r. c. 1974–1934 BC), is the earliest king whose length of reign is recorded in the Assyrian King List, a later document recording the kings of Assyria and their reigns. Erishum is noteworthy for being the earliest known ruler in world history to experiment with free trade, leaving the initiative for trade and large-scale foreign transactions entirely to his populace. Though large institutions, such as the temples and the king himself, did take part in trade, the financing itself was provided by private bankers, who in turn bore nearly all the risk (but also earned nearly all the profits) of the trading ventures. The king earned a portion of the profit through imposing tolls and the money gained was used to expand Assur and its institutions. Through Erishum's efforts, Assur quickly established itself as a prominent trading state in northern Mesopotamia and Anatolia.

It is clear that an extensive long-distance Assyrian trade network was established relatively quickly, the first notable impression Assyria left in the historical record. Notable collections of Old Assyrian cuneiform tablets have been found in trading colonies established by the Assyrians in their trade network. The most notable locality excavated is Kültepe, near the modern city of Kayseri in Turkey. At this time, Kültepe was also a city-state ruled by its own line of kings. Over 22,000 Assyrian cuneiform clay tablets have been found at the site. In some way, Assur was able to maintain its central position in its trade network despite being small and having no known history of military activity, though it may be that military activity did in fact play a part. Assur's importance as a trading center declined in the 19th century BC, perhaps chiefly because of increasing conflict between states and rulers of the ancient Near East leading to a general decrease in trade. From this time to the end of the Old Assyrian period, Assur frequently fell into conflict with larger foreign states and empires. In particular, the nearby centers of Eshnunna and Ekallatum threatened the continued existence of the Assur city-state. However Assyrian records during the reigns of Ilu-shuma, Erishum I and Sargon I show signs of intervention in southern Mesopotamia, which was under pressure from Elamites to the east and Amorites to the west. It is unclear whether this was military intervention in support of their fellow Akkadian speakers, favourable trading terms or both. The original city-state came to an end c. 1808 BC when it was conquered by the Amorite ruler of Ekallatum, Shamshi-Adad I, who deposed Erishum II, the last king of the Puzur-Ashur dynasty after having been repelled by his predecessor, and took the city for himself.

Shamshi-Adad's extensive conquests in northern Mesopotamia eventually made him the ruler of the entire region, founding what some scholars have termed the "Kingdom of Upper Mesopotamia". To rule his realm, Shamshi-Adad established his capital at the city of Shubat-Enlil. Around 1785 BC, Shamshi-Adad placed his two sons in control of different parts of the kingdom, the elder son Yasmah-Adad being granted Mari and the younger son Ishme-Dagan I being granted Ekallatum and Assur. Though the locals in Assur considered Shamshi-Adad and his family to be foreign conquerors, Shamshi-Adad did have certain respect for Assur and sometimes stayed in the city and partook in its religious ceremonies. Shamshi-Adad also oversaw the renovation of the city, the rebuilding of the temple of Ashur and the addition of a sanctuary dedicated to the head of the Mesopotamian pantheon, Enlil. It is possible that Shamshi-Adad promoted a theology that equated Ashur and Enlil as one and the same. In that case, his theology was hugely influential as Assyrians in later times attributed the role of "king of the gods" to Ashur, a role otherwise typically attributed to Enlil. In the 18th century BC, Shamshi-Adad's kingdom became surrounded by competing large states, particularly the southern kingdoms of Larsa, Babylon and Eshnunna and the western kingdoms of Yamhad and Qatna. The success and survival of his own realm chiefly relied on his personal strength and charisma. Shamshi-Adad's death in c. 1776 BC led to the collapse of the kingdom. His principal successor, Ishme-Dagan I, ruled from Ekallatum and retained control only of that city and of Assur.

The time between the collapse of Shamshi-Adad's kingdom in the 18th century BC and the rise of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the 14th century BC is often regarded by modern scholars as an Assyrian "Dark Age" due to the lack of sufficient historical evidence to clearly establish events during this time. It is clear from surviving records that the geopolitical situation in northern Mesopotamia was highly volatile, with frequent shifts in power. In c. 1772 BC Ibal-pi-el II of Eshnunna invaded and conquered Ishme-Dagan's kingdom, though he returned to power not long thereafter. A few years later, an army from Elam invaded northern Mesopotamia and seized a few cities. In c. 1761 BC, Assur, perhaps only briefly, fell under the control of the Old Babylonian Empire under Hammurabi. At some point, Assur returned to being an independent city-state. There was during this time also significant infighting within the government of Assur itself, as members of Shamshi-Adad's dynasty fought with native Assyrians and Hurrians for control of the city. Eventually, the Shamshi-Adad dynasty's rule over Assur came to an end through the Assyrian usurper Puzur-Sin re-establishing native rule. The defeat of the Babylonians and Amorites did not mean an end to the troubles, as there was a time of non-dynastic kings and further infighting before the rise of Bel-bani c. 1700 BC. Bel-bani founded the Adaside dynasty, which after his reign ruled Assyria for about a thousand years.
In large parts, the invasion or raid of southern Mesopotamia by the Hittite king Mursili I in c. 1595 BC was critical to Assyria's later development. This invasion destroyed the then dominant power in southern Mesopotamia, the Old Babylonian Empire, which created a vacuum of power that led to the formation of the Kassite kingdom of Babylonia in the south and the Hurrian Mitanni state to the north of Assyria. Assyrian rulers from c. 1520 to c. 1430 were more politically assertive than their predecessors, both regionally and internationally. Puzur-Ashur III (r. c. 1521–1498 BC) is the earliest Assyrian king to appear in the Synchronistic History, a later text concerning border disputes between Assyria and Babylonia, suggesting that Assyria first entered into diplomacy and conflict with Babylonia at this time and that Assur at this time ruled a small stretch of territory beyond the city itself. Around c. 1430 BC, Assur was subjugated by Mitanni and forced to become a vassal, an arrangement that lasted for about 70 years, until c. 1360 BC. Assur retained some autonomy under the Mitanni kings, as Assyrian kings during this time are attested as commissioning building projects, trading with Egypt and signing boundary agreements with the Kassites in Babylon. Another Hittite invasion, by Šuppiluliuma I in the early 14th century BC, effectively crippled the Mitanni kingdom. After his invasion, Assyria succeeded in freeing itself from its suzerain, achieving independence once more in the early 14th century BC, and under Ashur-uballit I (r. c. 1363–1328 BC), whose rise to power and conquests at the expense of the Mitanni and Babylonians traditionally marks the transition between the Old and Middle Assyrian periods.


Middle Assyrian period (1363–912 BC)


Rise of Assyria

Ashur-uballit I was the first native Assyrian ruler to claim the royal title šar ("king"). Shortly after achieving independence, he further claimed the dignity of a great king on the level of the Egyptian pharaohs and the Hittite kings. Ashur-uballit's claim to be a great king meant that he also embedded himself in the ideological implications of that role; a great king was expected to expand the borders of his realm to incorporate "uncivilized" territories, ideally eventually ruling the entire world. Ashur-uballit's reign was often regarded by later generations of Assyrians as the true birth of Assyria. The term "land of Ashur" (māt Aššur), i.e. designating Assyria as comprising a larger kingdom, is first attested as being used in his time. Assyria's rise was intertwined with the decline and fall of the Mitanni kingdom, its former suzerain, which allowed the early Middle Assyrian kings to expand and consolidate territories in northern Mesopotamia. Ashur-uballit mainly warred against small states in the southern vicinity of the Assyrian heartland. He engaged in diplomacy with both Babylonia, ruled by Burnaburiash II, and Egypt, ruled by Akhenaten. Ashur-uballit's successors Enlil-nirari (r. c. 1327–1318 BC) and Arik-den-ili (r. c. 1317–1306 BC) were less successful than Ashur-uballit in expanding and consolidating Assyrian power, and as such the new empire developed somewhat haltingly and remained fragile. Enlil-nirari's reign was the beginning of the historical enmity between Assyria and Babylonia after Kurigalzu II, a king the Assyrians had helped gain the Babylonian throne, attacked Assyria. Kurigalzu's betrayal resulted in deep trauma and was still referenced in Assyrian writings concerning Babylonia more than a century later.
Under the warrior-kings Adad-nirari I (r. c. 1305–1274 BC), Shalmaneser I (r. c. 1273–1244 BC) and Tukulti-Ninurta I (r. c. 1243–1207 BC), Assyria began to realize its aspirations of becoming a significant regional power. Adad-nirari was the first Assyrian king to march against the remnants of the Mitanni kingdom and the first Assyrian king to include lengthy narratives of his campaigns in his royal inscriptions. Adad-nirari early in his reign defeated Shattuara I of Mitanni and forced him to pay tribute to Assyria as a vassal ruler. After a revolt by Shattuara's son Wasashatta Adad-niari annexed some Mitanni lands and constructed a royal palace for himself at Taite, a former Mitanni capital. Adad-nirari also fought with Babylonia, defeating the Babylonian king Nazi-Maruttash at the Battle of Kār Ištar c. 1280 BC and redrawing the border between the two kingdoms in Assyria's favor.

Assyrian campaigns and conquests intensified under Shalmaneser I. Shalmaneser's most significant wars were those directed towards the west and north. After the Mitanni king Shattuara II rebelled against Assyrian authority, Shalmaneser campaigned against him to suppress the resistance. As a result of Shalmaneser's victory in the campaign, the Mitanni capital of Washukanni was sacked and the Mitanni lands were formally annexed into the Assyrian Empire. Shalmaneser's reign also saw worsening relations with the Hittites, who had supported Shattuara II's revolt. Shalmaneser warred several times against Hittite vassals in the Levant. Conflict with the Hittites continued in the reign of Shalmaneser's son Tukulti-Ninurta I until the Assyrian victory at the Battle of Nihriya c. 1237 BC, which marked the beginning of the end of Hittite influence in northern Mesopotamia and the annexation of formerly Hittite territories in the Levant and Anatolia. In addition to his various campaigns and conquests, which brought the Middle Assyrian Empire to its greatest extent, Tukulti-Ninurta is also famous for being the first Assyrian king to transfer the capital of Assyria away from Assur itself. In his eleventh year as king (c. 1233 BC), Tukulti-Ninurta inaugurated the new capital city Kar-Tukulti-Ninurta, named after himself (the name meaning "fortress of Tukulti-Ninurta"). The city only served as the capital during Tukulti-Ninurta's reign, with later kings returning to ruling from Assur.
Tukulti-Ninurta's main goal was Babylonia in the south; he intentionally escalated conflict with the Babylonian king Kashtiliash IV through claiming "traditionally Assyrian" lands along the eastern Tigris river. Shortly thereafter, he invaded Babylonia in an unprovoked attack. After capturing cities such as Sippar and Dur-Kurigalzu and defeating Kashtiliash in battle, Tukulti-Ninurta eventually succeeded in conquering Babylonia c. 1225 BC. He was the first Assyrian king to assume the traditionally southern Mesopotamian title "king of Sumer and Akkad" and the first native Mesopotamian to be crowned king of Babylon, its previous rulers having all been Amorites and Kassites. Assyrian control over Babylonia was quite indirect, ruling through appointing vassal kings such as Adad-shuma-iddina. After putting down a Babylonian uprising, Tukulti-Ninurta added to his title the style šamšu kiššat niše ("sun[god] of all people"), a highly unusual style since the Assyrian king was typically regarded to be the representative of a god and not divine himself. Eventually Babylonia fell out of Tukulti-Ninurta's grasp. An uprising led by Adad-shuma-usur, perhaps a son of Kashtiliash IV, drove the Assyrians out of Babylonia c. 1216 BC. The loss of Babylonia increased growing dissatisfaction with Tukulti-Ninurta's rule. His long and prosperous reign ended with his assassination, which in turn was followed by inter-dynastic conflict and a significant drop in Assyrian power.


Troubles and decline

The successors of Tukulti-Ninurta were unable to maintain Assyrian power and the empire became increasingly restricted to just the Assyrian heartland. The decline of the Middle Assyrian Empire broadly coincided with the latter period of the  Late Bronze Age collapse, a time when the ancient Near East, North Africa, Caucasus and Southeast Europe experienced monumental geopolitical changes; within a single generation, the Hittite Empire and the Kassite dynasty of Babylon had fallen, and Egypt had been severely weakened through losing its lands in the Levant. Modern researchers tend to varyingly ascribe the Bronze Age collapse to large-scale migrations, invasions by the mysterious Sea Peoples, new warfare technology and its effects, starvation, epidemics, climate change and an unsustainable exploitation of the working population. Tukulti-Ninurta's direct dynastic line came to an end c. 1192 BC, when the grand vizier Ninurta-apal-Ekur, a descendant of Adad-nirari I, took the throne for himself. Ninurta-apal-Ekur and his immediate successors were no more able than Tukulti-Ninurta's descendants to halt the decline of the empire.
Ninurta-apal-Ekur's son Ashur-dan I (r. c. 1178–1133 BC), improved the situation somewhat, campaigning against the Babylonian king Zababa-shuma-iddin, but his two sons Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur and Mutakkil-Nusku struggled for power with each other after his death. Though Mutakkil-Nusku emerged victorious, he ruled for less than a year. Mutakkil-Nusku warred against the Babylonian king Itti-Marduk-balatu, a conflict which continued in the reign of his son Ashur-resh-ishi I (r. 1132–1115 BC). In the Synchronistic History (a later Assyrian document), Ashur-resh-ishi is cast as a savior of the Assyrian Empire, defeating the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar I in several battles. In some of his inscriptions, Ashur-resh-ishi claimed the epithet "avenger of Assyria" (mutēr gimilli māt Aššur).
Due to Ashur-resh-ishi's victories over Babylonia, his son Tiglath-Pileser I (r. 1114–1076 BC) could focus his attention on other territories without worrying about southern attacks. Texts written already during his first few regnal years demonstrate that Tiglath-Pileser ruled with more confidence than his immediate predecessors, using titles such as "unrivalled king of the universe, king of the four quarters, king of all princes, lord of lords" and epithets such as "splendid flame which covers the hostile land like a rain storm". Tiglath-Pileser went on significant campaigns to the west and north, incorporating both territories lost after Tukulti-Ninurta's reign and territories that had never before been under Assyrian rule. Tiglath-Pileser's inscriptions are the first Assyrian inscriptions to describe punitive measures against rebelling cities and regions in any detail. He also increased the size of the Assyrian cavalry and introducing war chariots on a grander scale than previous kings. Though one of the most successful Middle Assyrian kings, Some of Tiglath-Pileser's conquests were not long-lasting and several territories, especially in the west, were likely lost again before or just after his death. Assyria became overstretched and Tiglath-Pileser's successors were forced to adapt to be on the defensive. An increasing problem from the late reign of Ashur-bel-kala onwards were the Aramean tribes in the west. Due to the Aramean tactics of avoiding open battle and instead attacking the Assyrians in numerous minor skirmishes, the Assyrian army could in conflict with them not take advantage of their combat, technical and numerical superiority.

From the time of Eriba-Adad II (r. 1056–1054 BC) onwards, the kings were unable to maintain the achievements of their predecessors. This period of renewed decline was not reversed until the middle of the 10th century BC. Though this period is poorly documented, it is clear that Assyria underwent a major crisis. The Arameans continued to be Assyria's most prominent enemies, at times raiding deep into the Assyrian heartland. Their attacks were uncoordinated raids carried out by individual groups, which meant that even though the Assyrians defeated several Aramean groups in battle, their guerrilla tactics and ability to withdraw into difficult terrain quickly prevented the Assyrians from ever achieving a lasting victory. Though control was lost over most of the Middle Assyrian Empire, the Assyrian heartland remained safe and intact, protected by its geographical remoteness and the military capabilities of its army. Assyria was not the only realm fragmented during this period, which meant that the fragmented territories now surrounding the Assyrian heartland in time proved to be easy conquests for the Assyrian army. Ashur-dan II (r. 934–912 BC) reversed Assyrian decline, campaigning in the peripheries of the Assyrian heartland, primarily in the northeast and northwest. His campaigns paved the way for grander efforts to restore and expand Assyrian power under his successors, and the end of his reign marks the transition to the Neo-Assyrian period.


Neo-Assyrian period (911–609 BC)


Revitalization, expansion and dominance
Through decades of military conquests, the early Neo-Assyrian kings worked to retake the former lands of their empire and re-establish the position of Assyria as it was at the height of the Middle Assyrian Empire. The reigns of Adad-nirari II (r. 911–891 BC) and Tukulti-Ninurta II (r. 890–884 BC) saw the slow beginning of this project. Since the reconquista had to begun nearly from scratch, its eventual success was an extraordinary achievement. Adad-nirari's most important conquest was the reincorporation of the city of Arrapha (modern-day Kirkuk) into Assyria, which in later times served as the launching point of innumerable Assyrian campaigns to the east. Adad-nirari also managed to secure a border agreement with the Babylonian king Nabu-shuma-ukin I, a clear indicator that Assyrian power was on the rise. The second and more substantial phase of early Neo-Assyrian expansion began under Tukulti-Ninurta's son Ashurnasirpal II (r. 883–859 BC), whose conquests made the Neo-Assyrian Empire the dominant political power in the Near East.
One of Ashurnasirpal's most persistent enemies was the Aramean king Ahuni of Bit Adini. Ahuni's forces broke through across the Khabur and Euphrates several times and it was only after years of war that he at last accepted Ashurnasirpal as his suzerain. Ahuni's defeat was highly important since it marked the first time since Ashur-bel-kala (r. 1073–1056 BC), two centuries prior, that Assyrian forces had the opportunity to campaign further west than the Euphrates. Making use of this opportunity, Ashurnasirpal in his ninth campaign marched to the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, collecting tribute from various Phoenician, Aramean, Cilician, and Neo-Hittite kingdoms on the way. A significant development during Ashurnasirpal's reign was the second transfer of the Assyrian capital away from Assur. Ashurnasirpal restored the ancient and ruined town of Kalhu (the biblical Calah and Medieval Nimrud) also located in the Assyrian heartland, and in 879 BC designated that city as the new capital of the empire, employing thousands of workers to construct new fortifications, palaces and temples in the city. Though no longer the political capital, Assur remained the ceremonial and religious center of Assyria.

The reign of Ashurnasirpal's son Shalmaneser III (r. 859–824 BC) also saw a considerable expansion of Assyrian territory. Lands conquered under Ashurnasirpal were consolidated and divided into further provinces and Shalmaneser's campaigns were also more wide-ranging than those of his predecessors. The most powerful and threatening enemy of Assyria at this point was the Hurro-Urartian speaking kingdom of Urartu in the north; following in the footsteps of the Assyrians, the Urartian administration, culture, writing system and religion closely followed those of Assyria. The Urartian kings were also autocrats very similar to the Assyrian kings. The imperialist expansionism of both states often led to military clashes, despite being separated by the Taurus Mountains. Shalmaneser for a time neutralized the Urartian threat after he in an ambitious campaign in 856 BC sacked the Urartian capital of Arzashkun and devastated the heartland of the kingdom. In 853 BC, Shalmaneser was forced to fight against a large coalition of western states assembled at Tell Qarqur in Syria, led by the Aramean Hadadezer, the king of Aram-Damascus. Though Shalmaneser fought them at the Battle of Qarqar in the same year, the battle appears to have been indecisive. After Qarqar, Shalmaneser focused on the south. He allied with the Babylonian king Marduk-zakir-shumi I, aiding his southern neighbor in both defeating the usurper Marduk-bel-ushati and in fighting against the migrating Chaldeans in the far south of Mesopotamia. After the death of Hadadezer in 841 BC, Shalmaneser managed to incorporate some further western territories. In the 830s, his armies reached into Cilicia and Cappadocia in Anatolia and in 836, Shalmaneser reached Ḫubušna (near modern-day Ereğli), one of the westernmost places ever reached by Assyrian forces. Though successful, Shalmaneser's conquests had been very quick and had not been fully consolidated by the time of his death.

From the late reign of Shalmaneser III onwards, the Neo-Assyrian Empire entered into what scholars call the "age of the magnates", when powerful officials and generals were the principal wielders of political power, rather than the king. The last few campaigns of Shalmaneser's reign were not led by the king, probably on account of old age, but rather by the capable turtanu (commander-in-chief) Dayyan-Assur. Shalmaneser's final years became preoccupied by an internal crisis when one of his sons, Ashur-danin-pal, rebelled in an attempt to seize the throne, possibly because the younger son Shamshi-Adad had been designated as heir instead of himself. When Shalmaneser died in 824 BC, Ashur-danin-pal was still in revolt, supported by a significant portion of the country, most notably the former capital of Assur. Shamshi-Adad acceded to the throne as Shamshi-Adad V, perhaps initially still a minor and a puppet of Dayyan-Assur. Though Dayyan-Assur died during the early stages of the civil war, Shamshi-Adad was eventually victorious, apparently due to help from the Babylonian king Marduk-zakir-shumi or his successor Marduk-balassu-iqbi. The age of the magnates is typically characterized as a period of decline, with little to no further territorial expansion and weak central power. This does not mean that there were no successes in this time. In 812 BC, Shamshi-Adad managed to termporarily conquer large portions of Babylonia and numerous campaigns were conducted under his son Adad-nirari III (r. 811–783 BC) which resulted in new territory both in the west and east. Early in Adad-nirari's reign, Adad-nirari and his mother Shammuramat (the inspiration for the mythical Assyrian queen Semiramis) expanded Assyrian control in Syria and Ancient Iran. The low point of the age of the magnates were the reigns of Adad-nirari's sons Shalmaneser IV (r. 783–773 BC), Ashur-dan III (r. 773–755 BC) and Ashur-nirari V (r. 755–745 BC), from which very few royal documents are known and officials grew even more bold, in some cases no longer even crediting the kings for their achievements.
Ashur-nirari V was succeeded by Tiglath-Pileser III (r. 745–727 BC), probably his brother and generally assumed to have usurped the throne. Tiglath-Pileser's accession ushered in a new age of the Neo-Assyrian Empire; while the conquests of earlier kings were impressive, they contributed little to Assyria's full rise as a consolidated empire. Through campaigns aimed at outright conquest and not just extraction of seasonal tribute, as well as reforms meant to efficiently organize the army and centralize the realm, Tiglath-Pileser is by some regarded as the first true initiator of Assyria's "imperial" phase. Tiglath-Pileser is the earliest Assyrian king mentioned in the Babylonian Chronicles and in the Hebrew Bible and thus the earliest king for which there exists important outside perspectives on his reign. Early on, Tiglath-Pileser reduced the influence of the powerful magnates. Tiglath-Pileser campaigned in all directions with resounding success. His most impressive achievements were the conquest and vassalization of the entirety  of the Levant all the way to the Sinai and Egyptian border, his domination of the Persians and Medes to the east, the Arabs to the south of Babylonia, and the 729 conquest of Babylonia, after which he and later Assyrian kings often ruled as both "king of Assyria" and "king of Babylon". By the time of his death in 727 BC, Tiglath-Pileser had more than doubled the territory of the empire. His policy of direct rule rather than rule through vassal states brought important changes to the Assyrian state and its economy; rather than tribute, the empire grew more reliant on taxes collected by provincial governors, a development which increased administrative costs but also reduced the need for military intervention. Also noteworthy was the large scale in which Tiglath-Pileser undertook resettlement policies, settling tens, if not hundreds, of thousand foreigners in both the Assyrian heartland and in far-away underdeveloped provinces.


Sargonid dynasty

Tiglath-Pileser's son Shalmaneser V (r. 727–722 BC) was after only a brief reign usurped by Sargon II (r. 722–705 BC), either his brother or a non-dynastic usurper. Sargon founded the Sargonid dynasty, which would rule until the fall of the Assyrian Empire. Sargon's accession, possible marking the end of the nearly thousand-year long Adaside dynasty, was met with considerable internal unrest. In his own inscriptions Sargon claims to have deported 6,300 "guilty Assyrians", probably Assyrians from the heartland who opposed his accession. Several peripheral regions of the empire also revolted and regained their independence. The most significant of the revolts was the successful uprising of the Chaldean warlord Marduk-apla-iddina II, who took control of Babylon, restoring Babylonian independence, and allied with the Elamite king Ḫuban‐nikaš I. While Sargon was campaigning in the east in 720 BC, his generals also put down a major revolt in the western provinces, led by Yau-bi'di of Hamath.
After securing the silver treasury of the city of Carchemish in 717 BC, Sargon began construction of another new imperial capital. The new city was named Dur-Sharrukin ("Fort Sargon") after himself. Unlike Ashurnasirpal's project at Nimrud, Sargon was not simply expanding an existing, albeit ruined, site but building a new settlement from scratch. Sargon was militarily successful and frequently went to war. Between just 716 and 713, Sargon fought against Urartu, the Medes, Arab tribes, and Ionian pirates in the eastern Mediterranean. In 710 BC, Sargon retook Babylon, driving Marduk-apla-iddina into exile in Elam. Between 710 and 707 BC, Sargon resided in Babylon, receiving foreign delegations there and participating in local traditions, such as the Akitu festival. In 707 BC, Sargon returned to Nimrud and in 706 BC, Dur-Sharrukin was inaugurated as the empire's new capital. Sargon did not get to enjoy his new city for long; in 705 BC he embarked on his final campaign, directed against Tabal, and died in battle in Anatolia.

Sargon's son Sennacherib (r. 705–681 BC) moved the capital to Nineveh, which was extensively renovated in his reign. Sargon's battlefield death had theological implications and some of the conquered regions of the empire once again began to assert their right to independence. Most prominently, the vassal states in the Levant stopped paying tribute to Sennacherib and Marduk-apla-iddina retook Babylon with the aid of the Elamites. It took several years for Sennacherib to defeat all of his enemies. Towards the end of 704 BC, Sennacherib retook Babylonia, though Marduk-apla-iddina escaped to Elam again. The Babylonian noble Bel-ibni, raised at the Assyrian court was appointed as vassal ruler of Babylon. In 701 BC, Sennacherib invaded the Levant, the most famous campaign of his reign. Bel-ibni's tenure as Babylonian vassal ruler did not last long and he was continually opposed by Marduk-apla-iddina and another Chaldean warlord, Mushezib-Marduk, who hoped to seize power for themselves. In 700 BC, Sennacherib invaded Babylonia again and drove Marduk-apla-iddina and Mushezib-Marduk away. Needing a vassal ruler with stronger authority, he placed his eldest son Ashur-nadin-shumi on the Babylonian throne.
In 694 BC, Sennacherib invaded Elam with the explicit goal to root out Marduk-apla-iddina and his supporters. Sennacherib sailed across the Persian Gulf with a fleet built by Phoenician and Greek shipwrights and captured and sacked countless Elamite cities. He never got his revenge on Marduk-apla-iddina, who died of natural causes before the Assyrian army landed, and the campaign instead significantly escalated the conflict with the anti-Assyrian faction in Babylonia and with the Elamites. The Elamite king Hallushu-Inshushinak took revenge on Sennacherib by marching on Babylonia while the Assyrians were busy in his lands and captured Ashur-nadin-shumi, who was taken to Elam and probably executed. In his place, the Elamites and Babylonians crowned the Babylonian noble Nergal-ushezib as king of Babylon. Sennacherib defeated Nergal-ushezib a few months later, but Mushezib-Marduk seized Babylon in late 693 BC and continued the struggle. In 689 BC, Sennacherib defeated Mushezib-Marduk and nearly completely destroyed Babylon. Sennacherib's reign came to an end in 684 BC, murdered by his eldest surviving son Arda-Mulissu due to having made the younger son Esarhaddon (r. 681–669 BC) heir. Esarhaddon defeated Arda-Mulissu in a civil war and successfully captured Nineveh, becoming king a mere two months after Sennacherib's murder.

Esarhaddon was deeply troubled, distrustful of his officials and family members owing to his tumultuous rise to the throne. His paranoia had the side-effect of leading to an increased standing of the royal women; his mother Naqi'a, queen Esharra-hammat and daughter Serua-eterat were all more powerful and prominent than most women in earlier Assyrian history. Despite his paranoia, and despite suffering from both disease and depression, Esarhaddon was one of Assyria's most successful kings. He rebuilt Babylon and led several successful military campaigns. Many of his campaigns were farther from the Assyrian heartland than those of any previous king. In the east, he in one campaign reached as far into modern-day Iran as Dasht-e Kavir. Esarhaddon's greatest military achievement was the 671 BC conquest of Egypt, which not only placed a land of great cultural prestige under Esarhaddon's rule but also brought the Assyrian Empire to its greatest ever extent. Despite his successes, Esarhaddon faced numerous conspiracies against his rule, perhaps because the king suffering from illness could be seen as the gods withdrawing their divine support for his rule. Through a well-developed network of spies and informants, Esarhaddon uncovered all of these coup attempts and in 670 BC had a large number of high-ranking officials put to death. In 672 BC, Esarhaddon decreed that his younger son Ashurbanipal (r. 669–631 BC) would succeed him in Assyria and that the older son Shamash-shum-ukin would rule Babylon. To ensure that the succession to the throne after his own death would go more smoothly than his own accession, Esarhaddon forced everyone in the empire, not only the prominent officials but also far-away vassal rulers and members of the royal family, to swear oaths of allegiance to the successors and respect the arrangement.
Ashurbanipal is often regarded to have been the last great king of Assyria. His reign saw the last time Assyrian troops marched in all directions of the Near East. One of the issues of Ashurbanipal's early reign were disagreements between Ashurbanipal and Shamash-shum-ukin. While Esarhaddon's documents suggest that Shamash-shum-ukin was intended to inherit all of Babylonia, it appears that he only controlled the immediate vicinity of Babylon itself since numerous other Babylonian cities apparently ignored him and considered Ashurbanipal to be their king. Over time, it seems that Shamash-shum-ukin grew to resent his brother's overbearing control and he revolted in 652 BC, aided by several Elamite kings. Ashurbanipal defeated his brother in 648 BC and Shamash-shum-ukin might have died by setting himself on fire in his palace. As vassal king of Babylon he was replaced by the puppet ruler Kandalanu. After his victory in Babylonia, Ashurbanipal marched on Elam. The Elamite capital of Susa was captured and devastated and large numbers of Elamite prisoners were brought to Nineveh, tortured and humiliated.

Though Ashurbanipal's inscriptions present Assyria as an uncontested and divinely supported hegemon of the entire world, cracks were starting to form in the empire during his reign. At some point after 656 BC, the empire lost control of Egypt, which instead fell into the hands of the pharaoh Psamtik I, founder of Egypt's twenty-sixth dynasty, originally appointed as a vassal by Ashurbanipal. Assyrian control faded from Egypt only gradually, without the need for revolt. Ashurbanipal went on numerous campaigns against various Arab tribes which failed to consolidate rule over their lands and instead wasted Assyrian resources. Perhaps most importantly, his devastation of Babylon after defeating Shamash-shum-ukin fanned anti-Assyrian sentiments in southern Mesopotamia, which soon after his death would have disastrous consequences. Ashurbanipal's reign also appears to have seen a growing disconnect between the king and the traditional elite of the empire; eunuchs grew unprecedently powerful in his time, being granted large tracts of lands and numerous tax exemptions. After Ashurbanipal's death in 631 BC, the Neo-Assyrian Empire quickly collapsed. His son and successor Ashur-etil-ilani ruled only briefly before another son of Ashurbanipal, Sinsharishkun, became king in 627 BC. In 626 BC Babylonia revolted again, this time led by Nabopolassar, probably a member of a prominent political family in Uruk. Though Nabopolassar was more successful than previous Babylonian rebels, it is unlikely that he would have been victorious in the end had the Medes under Cyaxares not entered the conflict in 615/614 BC. In 614 BC, the Medes and Babylonians sacked and destroyed Assur and in 612 BC, they captured and plundered Nineveh, Sinsharishkun dying in the capital's defense. Though the prince Ashur-uballit II, possibly Sinsharishkun's son, attempted to lead the resistance against the Medes and Babylonians from Harran in the west, he was defeated in 609 BC, marking the end of the ancient line of Assyrian kings and of Assyria as a state.


Post-imperial period (609 BC–AD 240)

The fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire after its final war with the Babylonians and Medes had dramatic consequences for the geopolitics of the ancient Near East: Babylonia, now the heart of the Neo-Babylonian Empire, experienced an unprecedented time of prosperity and growth, trade routes were redrawn and the economical organization and political power of the entire region was restructured. Archaeological surveys of the Assyrian heartland have consistently shown that there was a dramatic decrease in the size and number of inhabited sites in Assyria during the Neo-Babylonian period, suggesting a significant societal breakdown in the region. Archaeological evidence suggests that the former Assyrian capital cities, such as Assur, Nimrud and Nineveh, were initially nearly completely abandoned. The breakdown in society does not necessarily reflect an enormous drop in population; it is clear that the region became less rich and less densely populated, but it is also clear that Assyria was not entirely uninhabited, nor poor in any real sense. It is possible that large portions of the remaining Assyrian populace might have turned to nomadism due to the collapse of the local settlements and economy. Throughout the time of the Neo-Babylonian and later Achaemenid Empire, Assyria was a marginal and sparsely populated region, perhaps chiefly due to the limited interest of the Neo-Babylonian kings to invest resources into its economic and societal development. Individuals with Assyrian names are attested at multiple sites in Babylonia during the Neo-Babylonian Empire, including Babylon itself, Nippur, Uruk, Sippar, Dilbat and Borsippa. The Assyrians in Uruk apparently continued to exist as a community until the reign of the Achaemenid king Cambyses II (r. 530–522 BC) and were closely linked to a local cult dedicated to Ashur. Towards the end of the 6th century BC, the Assyrian dialect of the Akkadian language went extinct, having towards the end of the Neo-Assyrian Empire already largely been replaced by Aramaic as a vernacular language.
After the Achaemenid conquest of Babylon in 539 BC, Assyria was incorporated into the Achaemenid Empire, organized into the province Athura (Aθūrā). Some former Assyrian territory was also incorporated into the satrapy of Media (Mada). Though Assyrians from both Athura and Media joined forces in an unsuccessful revolt against the Achaemenid king Darius the Great in 520 BC, relations with the Achaemenid rulers were otherwise relatively peaceful. The Achaemenid kings interfered little with the internal affairs of their individual provinces as long as tribute and taxes were continuously provided, which allowed Assyrian culture and customs to survive under Persian rule. After the Achaemenid conquest of Babylon, the remaining inhabitants of Assur received the permission of Cyrus the Great to rebuild the city's ancient temple dedicated to Ashur and Cyrus even returned Ashur's cult statue from Babylon. The organization of Assyria into the single administrative unit Athura effectively kept the region on the map as a distinct political entity throughout the time of Achaemenid rule. In the aftermath of the Achaemenid Empire's conquest by Alexander the Great in 330 BC, Assyria and much of the rest of the former Achaemenid lands came under the control of the Seleucid Empire, founded by Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander's generals. Though Assyria was centrally located within this empire, and must thus have been a significant base of power, the region is rarely mentioned in textual sources from the period, perhaps because the significant centers of the Seleucid Empire was in the south in Babylon and Seleucia and in the west in Antioch. There were however significant developments in Assyria during this time. Archaeological finds such as coins and pottery from prominent Assyrian sites indicate that cities such as Assur, Nimrud and perhaps Nineveh were resettled under the Seleucids, as were a large number of villages.

The most significant phase of ancient Assyrian history following the fall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire transpired after the region was conquered by the Parthian Empire in the 2nd century BC. Under Parthian rule, the slow recovery of Assyria initiated under the Seleucids continued. This process eventually resulted in an unprecedented return to prosperity and revival in the 1st to 3rd centuries AD. The Parthians oversaw an intense resettlement and rebuilding of the region. In this time, the archaeological evidence shows that the population and settlement density of the region reached heights not seen since the Neo-Assyrian Empire. Under Parthian suzerainty, several small and semi-independent kingdoms of Assyrian character and large Assyrian populations cropped up in the former Assyrian heartland, including Osroene, Adiabene and Hatra. These kingdoms lasted until the 3rd or 4th centuries AD, though they were mostly ruled by dynasties of Iranian or Arab, not Assyrian, descent and culture. Aspects of old Assyrian culture endured in these new kingdoms, despite their foreign rulers. For instance, the main god worshipped at Hatra was the old Mesopotamian sun-god Shamash. Assur itself flourished under Parthian rule, with a large amount of buildings being either repaired or constructed from scratch. From around or shortly after the end of the 2nd century BC, the city may have become the capital of its own small semi-autonomous realm, either under the suzerainty of Hatra, or under direct Parthian suzerainty. Stelae erected by the local rulers of Assur in this time resemble the stelae erected by the Neo-Assyrian kings, the rulers appearing to have viewed themselves as continuing the old Assyrian royal tradition. The ancient temple dedicated to Ashur was restored for a second time in the 2nd century AD. Ancient Assyria's last golden age came to an end with the sack of Assur by the Sasanian Empire c. 240. During the sack, the Ashur temple was destroyed again and the city's population was dispersed.


Late antiquity and Middle Ages (240–1552)


Assyria under the Sasanian Empire (240–637)


Christianization
 
Though tradition holds that Christianity was first spread to Mesopotamia by Thomas the Apostle, the exact timespan when the Assyrians were first Christianized is unknown. The city of Arbela was an important early Christian center. According to the later Chronicle of Arbela, Arbela became the seat of a bishop already in AD 100, but the reliability of this document is questioned among scholars. It is known that both Arbela and Kirkuk later served as important Assyrian Christian centers in the Sasanian and later Islamic periods. According to some traditions, Christianity took hold in Assyria when Saint Thaddeus of Edessa converted King Abgar V of Osroene in the mid-1st century AD. From the 3rd century AD onwards, it is clear that Christianity was becoming the major religion of the region, with the Christian god replacing the old Mesopotamian deities. Assyrians had by this time already intellectually contributed to Christian thought; in the 1st century AD, the Christian Assyrian writer Tatian composed the influential Diatessaron, a synoptic rendition of the gospels.
Assyrian Christians were periodically persecuted in the Sasanian Empire until 422, when the Roman Empire instituted tolerance for Zoroastrianism (the official Persian religion in ancient times) and the Sasanians in turn officially allowed Christianity. The Assyrian churches became separate from those of the wider Christian world in the aftermath of the 451 Council of Chalcedon, which was rejected by the groups that would later be known as the Assyrian Church of the East and the Syriac Orthodox Church. The followers of the Church of the East where often pejoratively referred to as "Nestorians" by foreigners in later times, after Nestorius (c. 386–450), an Archbishop of Constantinople whose teachings, including denying the hypostatic union (that Jesus was both fully God and fully man), were condemned at Chalcedon. The followers of the Syriac Orthodox Church were often called "Jacobites", after Jacob Baradaeus, an anti-Chalcedon bishop of Edessa. The Sasanians, who geopolitically opposed the Romans and often found themselves at war with them, deliberately cultivated and supported the now schismatic Church of the East. In 421, the Synod of Markabta decided that the head of the church, now styled as the Patriarch of the Church of the East, was declared answerable only to Christ himself, in effect declaring the Church of the East independent. The church's independence was upheld under the authority of the Sasanian King of Kings Jamasp, who in 497 authorized a synod which also declared it independent and abolished the rule of celibacy for the clergy.


Histories and folklore

Though once more without any real political power, the population of northern Mesopotamia (called Asoristan by the Sassanids) continued to keep the memory of their ancient civilization alive and positively connected with the Assyrian Empire in local histories written during the Sasanian period. There continued to be important continuities between ancient and contemporary Mesopotamia in terms of religion, literary culture and settlement and Christians in northern Mesopotamia during the Sasanian period and later times connected themselves to the ancient Assyrian civilization. Figures like Sargon II, Sennacherib, Esarhaddon, Ashurbanipal and Shamash-shum-ukin long figured in local folklore and literary tradition. In large part, tales from the Sasanian period and later times were invented narratives, based on ancient Assyrian history but applied to local and current landscapes. Medieval tales written in Aramaic (or Syriac) for instance by and large characterize Sennacherib as an archetypical pagan king assassinated as part of a family feud, whose children convert to Christianity. The legend of the Saints Behnam and Sarah, set in the 4th century but written long thereafter, casts Sennacherib, under the name Sinharib, as their royal father. After Behnam converts to Christianity, Sinharib orders his execution, but is later struck by a dangerous disease that is cured through being baptized by Saint Matthew in Assur. Thankful, Sinharib then converts to Christianity and founds an important monastery near Mosul, called Deir Mar Mattai.
The 7th-century Assyrian History of Mar Qardagh made the titular saint, Mar Qardagh, out to be a descendant of the legendary Biblical Mesopotamian king Nimrod and the historical Sennacherib, with his illustrious descent manifesting in Mar Qardagh's mastery of archery, hunting and polo. A sanctuary constructed for Mar Qardagh during this time was built directly on top of the ruins of a Neo-Assyrian temple. Though some historians have argued that these tales were based only on the Bible, and not actual remembrance of ancient Assyria, some figures who appear in them, such as Esarhaddon and Sargon II, are only briefly mentioned in the Bible. The texts are also very much a local Assyrian phenomenon, as their historical accounts are at odds with those of other historical writings of the Sasanian Empire. The legendary figure Nimrod, otherwise viewed as simply Mesopotamian, is explicitly referred to as Assyrian in many of the Sasanian-period texts and is inserted into the line of Assyrian kings. Nimrod, as well as other legendary Mesopotamian (though explicitly Assyrian in the texts) rulers, such as Belus and Ninus, sometimes play significant roles in the writings. Certain Christian texts considered the Biblical figure Balaam to have prophesied the Star of Bethlehem; a local Assyrian version of this narrative appears in some Syriac-language writings from the Sasanian period, which allege that Balaam's prophecy was remembered only through being transmitted through the ancient Assyrian kings. In some stories, explicit claims of descent are made. According to the 6th-century History of Karka, twelve of the noble families of Karka (ancient Arrapha) were descendants of ancient Assyrian nobility who lived in the city during the time of Sargon II.


Āsōristān, Atūria and Nōdšīragān

The Sasanian Empire confusingly applied the name Āsōristān ("land of the Assyrians") to a province corresponding roughly to the borders of ancient Babylonia, thus excluding the historical Assyria in northern Mesopotamia. The population of Southern Mesopotamia was however during this time also largely made up of Aramaic-speaking Christians. The reason for naming Babylonia Āsōristān is not clear; perhaps the name originated during a time when northern Mesopotamia was occupied by the Roman Empire (and thus designated the remaining part of Mesopotamia under Sasanian control) or perhaps the name derived from the Sasanians also making the connection between the present Aramaic-speaking Christians of the regions and the ancient Assyrians.
Syriac-language sources continued to connect the term "land of the Assyrians" not to the Sasanian province in the south, but to the ancient Assyrian heartland in the north. Armenian historians, such as Anania Shirakatsi, also continued to identify Assyria as northern Mesopotamia; Shirakatsi referred to Aruastan as a region bordering Armenia and including Nineveh. The Sasanians divided northern Mesopotamia into Arbāyistān in the west and Nōdšīragān in the east. Nōdšīragān was the Sasanian name for Adiabene, which included much of the old Assyrian lands and continued to function as a vassal kingdom under Sasanian rule as well, perhaps (at least at times) ruled by Sasanian princes. A handful of Sasanian sources made the connection between northern Mesopotamia and Assyria as well, despite Āsōristān being used for the south. The province of Nōdšīragān is in some records alternatively referred to as Atūria or Āthōr (i.e. Assyria). Records from a 585 synod also testify to the existence of a metropolitan bishop of the Āṯōrayē (Assyrians), who was from northern Mesopotamia.
The Adiabene vassal kingdom was abolished c. 379, with Adiabene thereafter being governed by royally appointed governors. Because of the size and wealth of the region, these governors, though not kings, could still be influential. In the 6th-century, one such governor, Denḥa bar Šemraita, is referred to as "grand prince of all the region of Adiabene".


Muslim conquest (637–1096)

With the fall of Ctesiphon in 637, the Sasanian Empire lost control of its political heartland in Mesopotamia, which instead fell under the rule of the Rashidun Caliphate. Due to missionary work by the Church of the East, a significant share of the population in Mesopotamia and Persia were Christian by the time of the Muslim conquests. Episcopal sees had been established as far from Mesopotamia as Uzbekistan, India and China. Though the new caliphate did not officially persecute its Christian subjects, and even offered freedom of worship and a certain extent of self-administration, there were many local Muslim administrators who acted against the Christians, and as non-Muslims conquered through jihad, Christians such as the Assyrians had a choice between conversion to Islam, death, slavery or relegation to dhimmi, paying a special tax (jizya) to live under protected status. Some local Christians fled from the conquered territories into the lands under Roman rule and some, probably few in number, chose to convert to Islam for economic or political reasons. Certain Syriac Christian authors viewed the Muslim Conquest as a positive development and as a part of the struggle between the eastern churches and the Chalcedonians. The Muslim Conquest also strengthened local identities, such as that of the Assyrians, through to a large extent shattering the communications between local Christians and those in the Roman Empire. Under Muslim rule, the province or region containing the ancient Assyrian heartland was called al-Jazira, meaning "the island", in reference to the land between the Euphrates and Tigris.
Christian communities were thus not thrown into total upheaval and most Christians remained where they were and did not convert. The conquering Muslims were relatively few in number and mostly kept to themselves in their own settlements. At first, the Muslim conquerors discouraged conversions to Islam as they depended on the taxes collected from Christians and Jews. Discrimination against Christians was considerably milder than discrimination against Zoroastrians given that the Muslims saw Christianity as a forerunner of their own religion; in most respects the situation of the Christians under the early Muslim rulers differed little from their status under the Sasanians. Over time however, the growth of the Church of the East declined and eventually gradually reversed due to emigrations and conversions. Because Christians were barred from converting Muslims, the decline could not be stopped. In addition to repression, additional measures were also implemented from the time of the earliest Muslim rulers to harass and humiliate Christians. For instance, Christians were not allowed to build new churches (but were allowed to conduct repairs on current ones), they had to wear a distinct turban and belt, they were forbidden to disturb Muslims by ringing church bells and praying, and they were forbidden from riding horses and carrying weapons. These measures were however only rarely enforced and could in most cases be avoided through bribery. Additionally, contacts between Christians and Muslims were probably very infrequent under the Rashidun (637–661) and succeeding Umayyad Caliphate (661–750); many Christians lived in rural communities run administratively by village headmen (dihqans) and country squires (shaharija), positions occupied by other Christians. A large number of Christians under Rashidun and Umayyad rule likely lived their entire lives without once seeing a Muslim. 
There were a number of positions available largely only to Christians under the Umayyad caliphs. The Academy of Gondishapur in southern Mesopotamia, founded by Assyrians from Nisibis in the north, continued to operate and produce skilled Christian physicians under Muslim rule, many of whom were employed by the caliphs. There were also many Christians who rose to other high offices as scribes, accountants and teachers. The cultural and scientific flourishing in the Islamic Golden Age (8th to 14th century) was in large part possible through ancient Greek works previously having been copied and translated by Syriac Christian authors, which profoundly influenced science and philosophy in the Islamic world. Ancient works were copied and translated into Syriac from the 6th to 10th century, with Arabic translations (due to increasing Muslim interest) also becoming more common in the later stages of this timespan. Through the translation and copying of ancient works, the early medieval Syriac-language authors not only contributed to mainstream intellectual history, but also left a significant mark on the local Christian denominations. Among the most famous Syriac-language translators and scholars of this period were Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809–873) and Theophilus of Edessa (695–785), both of whom translated the works of ancient authors such as Aristotle and also wrote their own scholarly works.

The fall of the Umayyad Caliphate and the rise of the Abbasid Caliphate in its place in 750 was viewed positively by many Christians under Muslim rule, as the Abbasids were considered to be even more positively inclined towards Christians. In terms of church affairs, the Assyrians benefitted especially much from the regime change since the Abbasids ruled from Baghdad in Mesopotamia, and the Patriarchs of the Church of the East were thus closer to the seat of power than they had been under the Umayyads (who ruled from Damascus). Their influence increased under Abbasid rule, since the patriarchs were placed on the council of state of the caliphs. Under the Abbasids, Baghdad was transformed into a great center of learning, and debates were often held among intellectuals, regardless of their religion. At the same time as this more lenient approach, pressures on Christians gradually increased due to the Abbasids wishing to spread Islam. While converting influential Christians was often approached through polite conversation, Christians of lower classes were pressured through measures such as increasing the jizya tax. Through these policies, it was chiefly under the Abbasids that the Christian churches of Mesopotamia began their long period of decline. Though there were some influential patriarchs of the Church of the East under the Abbasids, such as Timothy I (780–823), they were considerably weaker than patriarchs such as Ishoyahb III (649–659) had been under the Umayyads. In the tenth century, there was a decisive religious shift in the religion among the populations under Muslim rule; before 850, Muslims had often been an elite minority, making up on average less than 20% of the population, but after 950 they were the majority and accounted for more than 60%. Emigrations and conversions continued to happen and many of the remaining Christians banded together for safety; adherents of the Church of the East migrated from southern Mesopotamia and Persia to northern Mesopotamia, where they still remained in substantial numbers.
Under the Seljuk Empire, which conquered much of the Middle East in the 11th century, the number of Christians in Mesopotamia and elsewhere continued to fall. Under the Seljuks, conversions were motivated not only by political and economic reasons but also by fear. In the face of the Crusades, Muslim attitudes towards Christians grew more hostile. The church officials of the Church of the East meanwhile grew rich and corrupt, something admitted even by several contemporary Christian writers, and spent most of their time in squabbles against officials from rival churches, such as the Syriac Orthodox Church and the Melkite Greek Catholic Church. They continued to enjoy institutional relationships with the Abbasid caliphs, who held a mainly ceremonial role under the Seljuks.


Crusaders, Mongols and Timurids (1096–1552)


Literary renaissance and changes in fortune

In the 10th–13th centuries, Syriac-language literature experienced something of a renaissance, indicated by the production of several significant pieces of literature, including the Chronicle of Michael the Great, written by Michael the Syrian, patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church, as well as the theological works of Dionysius bar Salibi and Abdisho bar Berika, and the scientific writings of Bar Hebraeus. This short heyday came to an end with persecutions in the 13th and 14th centuries. Records of personal names from this time demonstrate that the names of some Assyrians continued to be connected to ancient Mesopotamia even at this late time; an Arabic-language manuscript created 1272–1275 at Rumkale, a fortress on the Euphrates, records that a son of a physician and priest named Simeon was named Nebuchadnezzar (rendered Bukthanaṣar in the Arabic text). Simeon and Nebuchadnezzar were members of a prominent ecclesiastical family which also included Philoxenus Nemrud (a name deriving from Nimrud or Nimrod), a Patriarch of the Syriac Orthodox Church.
In the 11th century, substantial populations of Armenians and Syriac Christians lived in Cilicia in southern Anatolia and in northern Syria, referenced in, among other sources, accounts written by the Crusaders of the First Crusade. For propaganda purposes, the Crusaders typically described the Christians under Turkish rule as oppressed and in need of liberation, though it is clear from surviving accounts that the views of the Armenians and Assyrians themselves were more complex. Though it was the local Greeks, Armenians and Assyrians who opened the gates to the Crusaders at the Siege of Antioch in 1098, allowing them to capture the city, many indigenous Christians also collaborated with the Turks against the Crusaders. Sources written by the Crusaders describe difficulties in distinguishing Turks from local Christians, suggesting that the two groups had somewhat assimilated with each other despite the then short period of Turkish rule. This issue several times led to persecutions and massacres directed at the Turkish inhabitants of the captured cities also strongly affecting the local Christians. It is probable that large segments of the Christian population, Assyrians and the other groups, preferred the Turks rule over the Crusaders due to the Crusaders tending to be significantly more violent than the Seljuk Turks. Also affecting perceptions of Crusaders negatively was the large crusading armies exhausting the finances and food of any region they passed through, leading to famine. Some local Christians, more knowledgeable of the area than the Crusaders, are attested as selling food to crusading forces for enormously inflated prices in times of famine, profiting at the expense of the invading armies.

The Assyrians experienced their first major post-Muslim conquest change in fortune when the Mongol Empire conquered central Asia and the Middle East in the early 13th century. Though the Mongols followed tengrism and shamanism, their public policy in the vast regions they conquered was consistently to support religious freedom. Because several of the Mongol tribes that had followed Genghis Khan, the founder of the empire, were predominantly Christian and many tribal leaders had Christian wives or mothers, Christianity received special respect by the Mongol Khagans. Many among the Church of the East hoped that one of the Khagans might in time themselves convert to Christianity and declare the Mongol Empire a Christian Empire, like how Constantine the Great made the Roman Empire Christian. Hopes for a Mongol conversion to Christianity reached their zenith in the 1250s, when Hulagu Khan, ruler of the Ilkhanate (at this time the semi-autonomous Middle Eastern part of the Mongol Empire, later an independent state), drove the Seljuk Turks from Persia and Assyria, conquering cities like Baghdad and Mosul and reaching as far west as Damascus. Because many of the Mongol generals were Christians, Christians in conquered cities were often spared violence whereas Muslims were slaughtered. After his conquests, Hulagu further lifted restrictions imposed on the Christians, a move which was celebrated by the Christian population. When the Muslims retook Damascus shortly thereafter, the Christians were heavily persecuted as vengeance for their arrogance against the Muslims while the city was under Mongol rule.


Persecution under the Ilkhanate and Timurids

The period of freedom experienced by the Assyrians and other Christians came to an end when the Ilkhan Ghazan (r. 1295–1304) converted to Islam in 1295 and as one of his first acts as ruler ordered that all Buddhist temples, Jewish synagogues and Christian churches in his domain were to be destroyed. After the Muslims under his rule were inspired by the decree to direct violence towards the Christians, Ghazan intervened and somewhat reduced the severity of his decree, but some violence continued throughout his reign. The situation for the Assyrians and other Christians deteriorated even further under Ghazan's brother and successor, Öljaitü (r. 1304–1316). In 1310, the Assyrians and other Christians of Erbil (ancient Arbela) tried to escape persecution and captured the city's citadel. Despite the efforts of the Patriarch of the East, Yahballaha III, to calm the situation down, the insurrection was violently suppressed by the Kurds and the local Mongol governor, who captured the citadel on 1 July 1310 and massacred all the defenders, as well as all of the Christian inhabitants of the lower town in the city. Though the governor had been ordered not to attack the Christians, he suffered no repercussions for doing so and was hailed as a hero by the Muslims of the empire. After twenty years of persecution under Ghazan and Öljaitü, the internal structure and hierarchy of the Church of the East had been more or less destroyed and most of its church buildings were gone. The final general gathering of leaders of the church in Iran took place at a synod in 1318.
Some small communities of Assyrians thrived outside of Mongol control. In the early 14th century there was a thriving small Assyrian community in the Kingdom of Cyprus. The Assyrians of Cyprus, concentrated in Famagusta, had been relocated there from Tyre at some point after the Crusaders captured the city in 1187. Though they were few in number they were able to maintain trade connections with cities in Egypt, such as Damietta and Alexandria. Among the prominent members of this community were the metropolitan Eliya and the two traders Francis and Nicholas Lakhas. The Lakhas brothers were noted as extremely wealthy, often providing gifts to King Peter I of Cyprus and his court, though they fell into poverty after the Republic of Genoa invaded the island in 1373.
Though already violently suppressed under the late Ilkhans, the Assyrians faced their worst persecution yet after the remnants of the Ilkhanate were conquered in 1370 by the Muslim Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur, founder of the Timurid Empire. With the express goal of cleansing his domain of Christians and other "infidels," Timur oversaw the persecution and execution of an enormous number of Christians. Timur's efforts were so relentless that some among the Muslims doubted that he was Muslim at all since mercy is one of the major Muslim virtues. By the time of Timur's death in 1405, the Assyrians and other Christians of his empire had been almost exterminated, mostly due to Timur's actions but also because of factors such as famine and the Black Death. Timur's persecution campaigns are the chief reason why Christians, such as the Assyrians, still in modern times have only a minuscule presence in the Middle East. By 1410, there were only seven bishops in the Church of the East, a number down from the 24 bishops in 1238 and the 68 bishops in 1000. In effect, the persecutions reduced the once widespread church to little more than an ethno-religious group, closely tied only to the Assyrian people. In the mid-15th century, Patriarch Shemon IV made the office of patriarch hereditary, passing from uncle to nephew, a move motivated either by fearing interference in the election by Muslim authorities or by there being so few bishops left that a vote was meaningless.


Modern history (1552–present)


Schism and Ottoman rule (1552–1843)

Over the centuries since the collapse of the Assyrian Empire, the populace of different parts of former Assyria diverged somewhat in culture and beliefs as they were exposed to different neighbors and cultural influences. Generally, the Assyrians in the former Assyrian heartland were often exposed to cultural influences from Iran, whereas the Assyrians in the west, often today self-identifying as Syriacs, have been exposed to cultural influences from Greece. The ancient church of the Assyrians, the Church of the East, was divided in the 16th century, when some members formed a Catholic offshoot, the Chaldean Catholic Church. The followers of this church are generally called Chaldeans, which is still the common identity among Assyrians originating from central Assyria. The division of the Assyrian churches, often referred to as the schism of 1552, was chiefly the result of objections towards the perceived nepotism within the Church of the East. Already in 1450, Patriarch Shemon IV, already controversial for making his office hereditary,  began appointing his family members to church offices. In the mid-16th century, the widely unpopular Patriarch Shemon VII Ishoyahb, who had succeeded his brother Shemon VI, appointed two of his nephews, both of whom were minors, as metropolitan bishops. Such actions were so unpopular that a gathering of bishops in 1552 refused Shemon VII's authority and elected a patriarch of their own, Shimun VIII Yohannan Sulaqa. Sulaqa quickly made his way to Rome, where he submitted to Pope Julius III and was duly recognized as the new patriarch, styled by the Pope as the "Patriarch of Mosul and Assyria". This title was centuries later (1828) changed to "Patriarch of the Chaldeans".
The Ottoman Empire captured northern Mesopotamia from Safavid Iran during the early 16th century, Mosul being conquered by Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent in 1538. One of the first notable acts by the Ottomans in regards to the Assyrians was the arrest, torture and killing of the schismatic Sulaqu in 1555, an act instigated by Shermon VII. Still opposed to Shemon, the bishops ordained under Sulaqu then elected a successor, Abdisho IV Maron, who was recognized by Pope Pius IV in 1562. When Shemon VII died, his remaining followers refused to recognize the authority of Abdisho IV and instead recognized Eliya VI, Shemon VII's nephew, as the new patriarch. The division of the Church of the East led to each branch seeking closer relation with other Christian denominations, to the detriment of the other branch. The Chaldean Catholic Church began discussions with the Roman Catholic Church in 1552/1553, but only achieved full communion in 1830. Its relationship with the other Catholic Churches has deteriorated several times, particularly when hereditary succession was introduced in that church as well in 1600, something which led to a temporary break in communion with Rome. Eliya VIII of the Assyrian Church of the East during this time attempted to exploit the fall from grace of his rival to himself establish closer relations with Rome.
The religious divide within the Assyrian community has been among their greatest hindrances in modern history. In the Ottoman Empire, the populace was organized into various ethno-religious groupings, called millets, with their own autonomy and sets of laws. Whereas some other groups, such as the Armenians, were organized into a single millet despite internal religious differences, the Ottomans separated the Süryani (Syriac Orthodox) and Keldani (Chaldean) groups into two different millets through official recognition of the Chaldeans in 1831. The followers of the Assyrian Church of the East were never officially recognized as a distinct grouping, instead placed in the Armenian millet, formally under the authority of the Catholicos of All Armenians. The Armenian church however rarely interfered in their affairs. The centuries of Ottoman rule over the Assyrians were largely peaceful before the 19th century; as long as religious and ethnic minority communities paid their taxes and acknowledged the political dominion of the Ottoman sultans they were largely free to manage their own affairs, not only religiously and culturally but also legally and economically. Despite the atrocities that would be committed by the increasingly nationalist Turkish collapsing Ottoman Empire in the 19th and 20th centuries, the early centuries of Ottoman rule thus provided opportunities for cultural flourishing and political influence. From the late 15th century onwards, Assyrian literary production increased once more, much of which was concerned with copying earlier texts for preservation purposes.


Struggles, persecution and genocide (1843–1919)

Colonialism by western powers in the latter half of the 19th century led to the Assyrian people being caught between powerful colonizers on one hand and local nationalists and religious zealots on the other. Colonizations of the Assyrian homeland by the Ottoman, British and various local powers led to several massacres and deportations, particularly around the time of World War I. Most frequent and wide-ranging were persecutions by the Ottoman Empire and by various Kurdish groups. In 1843 and 1846, the Assyrians of Hakkari were massacred by the Kurdish emir of Bohtan and Hakkari, Bedir Khan Beg, and regional Ottoman forces. More than 10,000 were killed and thousands were captured. Thousands of Assyrians were also murdered in the Hamidian massacres (1894–1897) and in the Adana massacre (1909), which were otherwise mainly directed towards Armenians. In the Massacres of Diyarberkir in 1895, around 25,000 Assyrians were killed. Millennia of being an ethnic minority, combined with the many persecutions in the Middle Ages and early Modern period, reduced the number of Assyrians from as many as 20 million in ancient times to only about 500,000–600,000 people at the beginning of the 20th century.

Despite the suffering of the Assyrian people, the late 19th and early 20th centuries were also a time that saw major Assyrian cultural developments: the first Assyrian newspaper, Zahrirē d-Bahra ("Rays of Light") began publishing in Urmia in 1848, aided by American missionaries, and the first Assyrian political party, the Assyrian Socialist Party, was founded in 1917. The Assyrian Socialist Party prominently advocated for Assyrian independence; one of its co-founders, Freydun Atturaya, published the Urmia Manifesto of the United Free Assyria in 1917, which called for a free and united Assyria, with economic ties to Russia and stretching from Tur Abdin and Nusaybin (ancient Nisibis) to Urmia and Hakkari. Because of his Assyrian nationalist organizing, the authorities of the Soviet Union arrested Atturaya in 1924 and he was killed in 1926. He remains seen as a national hero and martyr by many Assyrians today.

In the Sayfo of the 1910s (mainly 1915), also known as the Assyrian genocide, part of a series of genocides imposed by the collapsing Ottoman Empire on its Christian minorities (alongside the Armenian and Greek genocides), perhaps as many as 250,000 Assyrians were killed and thousands more were forcibly converted to Islam. Among the most infamous massacres were massacres of, and atrocities towards, Armenians and Assyrians in the Diyarbekir Vilayet, overseen by the local governor Mehmed Reshid. On 10 June 1915, 400 prisoners, including several church leaders, were paraded in chains through Diyarbekir, organized by Reshid, and there was rampant beatings, torture and humiliation. Many Assyrian women testified that they had been raped or otherwise sexually abused. On 2 July 600 Assyrians were slaughtered outside the city walls. The Assyrians of Urmia in Iran refer to this time as Raqa raqa ("the Escape") due to 30,000 men, women and children fleeing from their homes in Urmia and Hakkari, travelling upwards of 600 kilometers to a refugee camp at Baqubah, near Baghdad. Almost a third of the refugees died along the way, murdered by bandits or due to exposure to the elements. Large segments of the Assyrian population in the Tur Abdin region fled across the Izla ridge into the plains surrounding Nusaybin, where many settled in what would later become the city of Qamishli in northern Syria, founded in 1926. The genocide led to an irrevocable loss in trust not only for the Turkish government, but also for the Kurdish people, who participated in the atrocities. Several Kurdish tribes assaulted and massacred Assyrian refugee caravans. On 1 July 1915, the village of Tell-Ermen, with a substantial Assyrian population, was invaded by Kurdish tribesmen. The local Assyrians sought refuge in the church, to no avail. Victims, regardless of age or gender, were decapitated, hacked to death and drawn and quartered. Afterwards, Kurdish women entered the church and stabbed any survivors to death. The bodies were disposed of by being burnt or thrown into wells.

An Assyrian independence movement took root as a result of these atrocities. In an effort to safeguard his people, Shimun XIX Benyamin, the Patriarch of the Church of the East, plead with the Allies of World War I for assistance and sought the aid of the Russian Empire. Under Shimun's spiritual leadership, the Assyrians took up arms against the Ottoman government and joined the side of the British in the war as the Assyrian volunteers. Shimun was assassinated on 3 March 1918 by the Kurdish chieftain Simko Shikak under a truce flag. The murder of Shimun did not put an end to the Assyrian defense force, which then came under the command of Agha Petros, who had been made a general by the French. Petros led the Assyrian forces for two years and dreamt of retaking abandoned Christian villages and founding an Assyrian state. Despite his charisma and dedication, Petros's conflict with the patriarchal family and the intrigues of the French and British in the region hindered him from becoming a recognized national leader and he was eventually exiled by the British to France, where he died in 1932. Other important figures of the independence movement included further military leaders who fought against the Ottomans and Kurds, such as Raphael Khan and Malik Khoshaba, as well as philosophers and authors, such as Ashur Yousif, author of the periodical Murshid Athiriyon ("Assyrian guide"), and Qasha Baba Nwiya-d-Wazirabad, founder of the independent Assyrian publication Kokhva ("The Star"). Yousif was hanged by the Ottomans alongside other intellectuals in 1915. In Iran, the press of the Zahrirē d-Bahra, which had published continuously since 1848, was destroyed in 1918. Many Assyrians fled from the Middle East entirely, with large numbers emigrating to the United States and South America. In the Assyrian diaspora, the first earnest Assyrian associations and organizations were created, including the Taw Mim Semkath (or Assyrian National School Association), founded in Stirling, New Jersey in 1899. This organization succeeded in opening an Assyrian school in Adana in 1919 to care for the orphans of the genocide, though it was forced to close in 1921 and relocated to Beirut in Lebanon.


Further calls for autonomy (1919–1957)

With the collapse and breakup of the Ottoman Empire and the Qajar dynasty in Iran and the rise of new nation states in their place, many of the minorities of the Middle East began asserting their rights to self-determination and sovereignty, including the Assyrians. At the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, after World War I, an unprecedented gathering of four Assyrian groups; from Iran and the Caucasus, Iraq, the United States, and Syria, presented a manifesto and championed the creation of an independent Assyrian state. The gathering is especially noteworthy for all groups, even those who otherwise identified as Chaldeans and Syriacs, coming together to present a united front as the descendants of "the ancient Assyrian nation", a term used by Ignatius Aphrem I of the Syriac Orthodox Church. The manifesto, later published under the title The Claims of the Assyrians as Presented to the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, defined the Assyrian people as being constituted by the "Nestorians", Chaldeans, Syriacs, Maronites, Persian Assyrians, Russian Assyrians and "Muslim Assyrians" (a group in which the delegation included the Yazidis and Shekaks). Due to the opposition of Great Britain, despite many British officials previously having promised support to the Assyrian volunteers in creating an Assyrian state, the Assyrians were left out of the treaties that divided the Ottoman Empire, with only a small mention being made of the need to "protect the Assyro-Chaldeans and other ethnic and religious minorities in the region". Though little came of their efforts on a geopolitical level, the delegation ensured that new lines of communication developed between the otherwise rival groups, long divided by religion and political borders.
After the establishment of British and French colonial rule in the Ottoman Empire's old lands in the Syria and Iraq, many Assyrians were enlisted by the British as soldiers in local colonial militias, perhaps a reason for later anti-Assyrian sentiment in the region. This anti-Assyrian sentiment was somewhat misguided as the British also enlisted large units of Arabs and Kurds. In 1921, Faisal I was granted a ruling hand of Mandatory Iraq as its king. Under the British mandate, the Assyrians significantly grew in number in northern Mesopotamia again. Though often barred from formal military and political service by the Iraqi authorities, there were many prominent politically active Assyrians. Piotr Vasili, an Assyrian born in Georgia, became the father of communism in Iraq as the mentor of Yusuf Salman Yusuf, also an Assyrian, who served as the first secretary of the Iraqi Communist Party. The Iraqi Communist Party has historically been popular among Assyrians owing to its opposition to the Iraqi government. Assyrian calls for independence and autonomy continued through the later 20th century. In 1932, Patriarch Shimun XXIII Eshai and other prominent Assyrians sent a petition to Great Britain and the League of Nations to recognize the Assyrians as a nation that has constantly lived in Iraq, not only a religious minority, and to work for further Assyrian autonomy. Just one year after Iraq became fully independent from the British, the military and local tribesmen in August 1933 carried out the Simele massacre which targeted Assyrian villages. Assyrian estimates place the death toll as high as 3,000 victims. August 7, which saw the most bloodshed, is still commemorated as the "Day of the Assyrian Martyrs".

In the wake of the Simele massacre, the League of Nations proposed an Assyrian settlement in 1935, though little came of it. In 1945, Shimun XXIII submitted the Assyrian National Petition to the newly established United Nations, urging the creation of an Assyrian state. Three years later in 1948, Shimun XXIII however urged the Assyrian people to reconcile with the Iraqi authorities and live as "loyal citizens", hoping that the Assyrians might eventually achieve autonomy instead of outright independence. It was in the aftermath of the Simele massacre and the previous atrocities committed against the Assyrian people that the distinct Assyrian church communities (i.e. the Syriacs and Chaldeans) began to truly advocate for separate identities; though not distinct ethnic groups in the normal sense, differences in customs and religious beliefs had by this point become palpable. This development probably coincided with the foundation of the secular Assyrian Democratic Organization in Syria in 1957.


Contemporary Assyria (1957–present)


Political and cultural movements

In the aftermath of the continued division of the Assyrian community, contributed to by both internal and external factors, many of the remaining Assyrians in Turkey and elsewhere became politically involved in left-wing movements, though they were mostly consumed by the more numerous and powerful Kurdish political movements, such as the Kurdistan Workers' Party. Due to continued Turkish annexation of Assyrian villages and imposing of Turkish names for them, many Assyrians fled Turkey, emigrating to countries such as Sweden, Germany, Austria and Switzerland. In Iran, Assyrians continued to remain as a small, albeit influential, minority until the Iranian Revolution of 1979, when many fled the country. Among the Assyrian developments in Iran prior to 1979 were the foundation in Tehran of the Assyrian Youth Cultural Society on 21 February 1950, an organization that formed the basis of the later Assyrian Universal Alliance, founded in France in 1968. After the Iranian Revolution, new religious pressures were imposed by the government, which among other things led to Assyrian schools being forced to change to using Iranian names.
Even after the Simele massacre the Iraqi government continued to impose policies in an effort to curb Assyrian culture. In the 1960s, 70 towns and villages in northern Iraq were destroyed, many were forcibly abandoned and more than 76 sites of religious or cultural significance were destroyed. In the "border clearings" of 1974–1978, many northern villages were destroyed, with thousands of families relocated in a forced urbanization campaign. In the Anfal campaign, primarily a massacre of the Kurds, the Iraqi government killed around 2,000 Assyrians and destroyed over fifty historical and cultural sites. Though the population of Assyrians in Iraq had risen to as many as over 1 million since the Sayfo, estimates suggest that it again fell to 300,000–400,000 between 1961 and 1991 as the result of mass emigrations. The Assyrians were not idle in the face of continued measures against them. Some, such as Margaret George Shello, joined the Kurdish cause against the Iraqi government, despite the historically poor relations between the two groups. Shello joined the Peshmerga in 1963, at the age of 20, as the organization's first female fighter and commanded the Kurdish forces at the Battle of Zawita Valley before her death in 1969, most likely assassinated by the Iraqi government or by a rival Kurdish faction. Since her death, Shello has become an icon among the female warriors of the Peshmerga.

The Iraqi government considered the sudden political unity between many of the Assyrians and Kurds to be a threat and made many unsuccessful attempts to divide the groups. In 1973, President Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr invited the Assyrian political leader Yaku Malek Ismael and Patriarch Shimun XXIII and offered to grant the Assyrians additional rights in return for funding Assyrian military units to attack the Kurds; Ismael and Shimun refused the offer. Assyrians in Iraq during this time also funded books and magazines (including the magazine Mordinna Atouraya, published in both Assyrian and Aramaic) and founded numerous organizations, such as Assyrian Unity and Freedom, the Assyrian Cultural Club and the Assyrian Sports Club. Other Assyrians became politically active and championed the cause for Assyrian autonomy. In the 1960s and 1970s, Hurmiz Malik Chikko led an unsuccessful struggle for autonomy. The most prominent Assyrian political party in Iraq, the Assyrian Democratic Movement (ADM), was founded in 1979. The ADM was established chiefly in response to the Iraqi government in its 1977 census refusing to acknowledge the existence of the Assyrian people, forcing Assyrians to register as either Arabs or Kurds.
Though some continued hostility between Assyrians and Kurds have been recorded since the late 20th century, the Assyrians have prominently participated in the political scene of the autonomous Kurdistan Region in Iraq since its autonomy in 1992. Assyrian political parties partook in the first 1992 Kurdistan Region parliamentary election, wherein some seats had been reserved for the Assyrian community. In the face of such collaboration, the Iraqi government changed tactics from persuasion to intimidation, pressuring Assyrian political leaders. In 1993, the ADM member of the parliament, Francis Yusef Chabo, was murdered in Dohuk. Though the position of the Assyrians in the rest of Iraq has mostly deteriorated, and despite their historical enmity, the Assyrians in the Kurdistan Region have mostly flourished, with their political, cultural and educational rights guaranteed. Since 1991, they have been able to publish newspapers and broadcast television in their own language; more than 30 Assyrian language schools have been created with government funding and more than 20 churches have been renovated and restored.


21st century

Today, the Assyrians mostly live in diaspora and continue to be divided into rival political factions and Christian denominations. In modern times there have been several unsuccessful efforts to reunify the Assyrian people under one common identity. In 22–24 October 2003, religious leaders of the various communities, politicians and civic club members met at the Ishtar Hotel in Baghdad in an effort to settle on a unified nomenclature. Among others presided over by Yonadam Kanna, secretary general of the ADM, the meeting settled on referring to the people as "Chaldo-Assyrian" and the language as "Syriac". Though the term "Chaldo-Assyrian" met with some initial acknowledgement, it also received much backlash, especially in the diaspora. Though some disagreement exists within the Chaldean community, both Assyrians and Chaldeans have for the most part agreed that it is an indisputable fact that they are the same people. Each side however retains its own opinion on what "same people" actually means. An uncontroversial unifying term sometimes used in certain contexts is the Arabic designation Masīḥī (meaning Christian). Some organizations use "Assyrian-Chaldean-Syriac". At the same time as efforts to unify the Assyrians failed, the Assyrians in Turkey experienced a resurgence as families formerly emigrated to France began to return to the region around Tur Abdin and Bohtan and rebuild. Though opposed by the Turkish government and local Kurdish groups, the local Assyrians continue to operate the major monasteries in the region, including the Mor Hananyo Monastery and the Mor Gabriel Monastery.
To counterweight the Kurdish political power in northern Iraq, some Assyrians advocating for autonomy have favored closer relations and unity with the other minorities of the region: the Yazidis and Iraqi Turkmen. Some Assyrians and Yazidis have advocated the idea that they are the same people, separated only by religion and culture, and have championed the inclusion of the Yazidis in the "Assyrian nation". In 2004, the Assyrian activist Hanna Hajjar championed the idea that an independent Assyria could be built together with the Turkmen as equal partners.

The Assyrians suffered persecution and genocide again in the power vacuum left in the aftermath of the Iraq War, as the Islamic State (ISIL) terrorist group swept over northern Iraq in 2014. ISIL commenced a campaign of ethnic cleansing and genocide of Christian minorities. After the Fall of Mosul in June 2014, the Christian inhabitants of the city were given the choice of leaving, converting or being killed. On 23 February 2015, ISIL fighters combed the region along the Khabur river in north-eastern Syria, imprisoning locals, destroying shrines, churches and monasteries and plundering and razing villages. In total, about 300 people were kidnapped and 3,000 were displaced. Many Assyrians were also executed during the time of ISIL control. ISIL threatened not only the lives of the Assyrian people but also their cultural heritage. Also in February 2015, claiming the ancient Mesopotamian artefacts and ruins represented "elements of idolatry from the age of ignorance", ISIL destroyed hundreds of ancient artefacts from Mosul and bulldozed large portions of the ruins of the ancient cities of Nimrud, Dur-Sharrukin, Hatra and Assur.
Though northern Mesopotamia was liberated from ISIL control in 2017–2019, the future of the Assyrian people and their ancient homeland remains uncertain. Large Assyrian communities still live in the region, most prominently in Qamishli, along the Khabur river, in the Nineveh Plains and in Aleppo, which received an influx of Assyrian refugees during World War I. Though several Assyrian military units were formed in response to the ISIL incursion, including the Khabour Guards, Sootoro and the Nineveh Plain Protection Units, they remain smaller than many other units in the region, such as the mainly-Kurdish People's Defense Units (YPG) and Peshmerga. The conflicts also led to tensions within the Assyrian community, as armed groups like the Khabour Guards and Nattoreh occasionally clashed with pro-YPG Assyrians like the Syriac Military Council. Despite these issues, local Assyrian self-defense groups were able to assert some limited self-governance; for instance, the Assyrian Democratic Party made a deal in 2017 which led to the withdrawal of the YPG from the Khabur valley, with it passing under control of the Khabour Guards and Nattoreh. Due to its central position in the Middle East, the Assyrian homeland and its remaining Assyrian population are threatened in the event of renewed intense conflict in the region. Among the diaspora, the continued persecutions and atrocities committed against the Assyrians that still live in the Assyrian homeland have led to fears that they will never be able to return, which has made "permanent emigration" a key part of their identity.
Despite the turmoil of the last 20 years, however, there are growing hopes in the Assyrian diaspora of a return to the Assyrian homeland, with slow moves back choosing to settle in Ankawa to preserve Assyrian identity and heritage.


See also


Notes


References


Bibliography

Hockey WA is the organisation responsible for the sport of Field Hockey in the state of Western Australia. Hockey WA is represented in the Hockey One competition by the Perth Thundersticks. Hockey WA also run the top club competitions in Australia, the Hockey WA Premier League for both Men and Women.
In late 2003, Hockey WA was formed from a merger between the Western Australian Men's Hockey Association and the Western Australian Women's Hockey Association. It is approaching 100 years since the establishment of the individual Associations and it is anticipated that the amalgamation will be of major benefit to Hockey in Western Australia.


Early history
Early records indicated that hockey matches were taking place in Western Australia around 1903 and that by 1906 four Teams existed in the Perth area. In 1906 an inter-club competition had begun and by 1908 the Western Australian Hockey Association had been formed.
Games involving women and particularly schoolgirls were reported in the early 1900s and the Western Australian Women's Hockey Association was officially formed on 14 June 1916.
The Western Australian Association decided to adopt the Rules and Regulations of The Hockey Association and sought affiliation with that England based body in 1907.
The early Western Australian teams were mainly located in the Perth area. However the Wilberforce Club Team emerged in 1906 and carried the name of the Hamersley Farm and Homestead, which was situated near York. The Wilberforce team was a family affair and for many of the matches the team mainly comprised the members of two families. The opposing teams were required to travel (by train) back and forth to York and to the City (some 100 kilometres each way) to complete their match programme.
The condition of some of the playing surfaces that were available in these early times was reported to be "poor". However, this may have been partly acceptable to the match participants who were often referred to as being "enthusiastic and robust". The "Association Ground" was the W.A.C.A Cricket Ground of today and was one of the better pitches and regular venues for the hockey matches. Matches were also played at the Royal Agricultural Society's Claremont Show-Grounds and at the South Perth Zoological Gardens.
In the first few years up to six teams including Perth, Wilberforce, Fremantle, YMCA, Claremont and Guildford engaged in hard-fought games in an endeavour to win the Hope Cup, which had been donated by Dr. Hope and was contested by the top grade teams from 1908. Early honours were shared between the Perth and Wilberforce Clubs. In the five-year period from 1908 to 1912 Wilberforce won the Cup three times and Perth won twice.
Inter-Club matches continued until 1915 when World War I intervened and it was in the early 1920s before hockey resumed on a competitive basis. The formation of an Australian Hockey Association had been under consideration and was formalised on 29 June 1925 when the first Annual General Meeting was held in Sydney.
In 1928, Western Australia participated for the first time in an Australian Senior Championship. The team travelled by Ocean Liner across the Bight to Adelaide to contest the Title, which was ultimately won by the Home Team. Following this, the other States agreed to travel to Perth to take part in the 1929 Carnival, which coincided with this State's Centenary year. Western Australia had its first Title victory in that special year and went on to win the Championship twice in the 1930s and was a strong contender thereafter.
After the Second World War and in the late 1940s, the hockey standards in Western Australia and to a lesser extent in other parts of Australia were strengthened by an influx of skilful and promising young players and coaches, particularly from India, who came to settle in Australia after Independence was gained.
The Senior Inter-State Championship was held annually and the venue rotated among the States. Western Australia was a prominent force. In the period from 1928 to 1992, Western Australia won 29 of the 61 Championships held and this included a nine-year period (1962–70) when eight titles were won. Since 1992, the National Hockey League has become the major annual inter-state competition and Western Australia has won six of the twelve Titles contested to date.
The Western Australian Women's Teams have also been successful at National Championship level. After first competing in 1921, Western Australia won the Championship on 43 occasions including 30 wins in the 35-year period (1957–1991).
The State Teams made contributions to the development of players and aided selection in Australia's Men and Women's National and International teams. In addition, Perth has been be acknowledged to be the centre of top-level inter-Club competition.


National Championships


Men


AHL
1991 – 2018
Champions: 1992, 1993, 1995, 1999, 2000, 2002, 2008, 2009, 2011


Hockey One
2019 - Present


Open
1925 - 1994
Champions: 1929, 1936, 1938, 1950, 1955, 1956, 1958, 1960, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1969, 1970, 1972, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1986, 1987, 1991


Under 21
1946 - Present
Champions: 1946, 1948, 1949, 1951, 1952, 1962, 1966, 1967, 1974, 1982, 1983, 1988, 1989, 1996, 2002, 2005, 2011, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026


Under 18
1994 - Present
Champions: 1998, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2015, 2016, 2022


Under 17
1982-1993
Champions: 1984, 1990, 1991,


Under 16
1950 - 1981
2024 - Present
Champions: 1952, 1953, 1954, 1955, 1957, 1958, 1962, 1970, 1973


Under 15
1980-2023
Champions: 1982, 1983, 1996, 1999, 2001, 2015, 2019


Under 14
2024 - Present
Champions: 2024, 2025


Under 13
2003 - 2023
Champions: 2018, 2023


Women


AHL
1993 – 2018 
Champions: 1994, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2010


Hockey One
2019 - Present 
 
Champions: 2024


Open
1910-1993
Champions: 1929, 1938, 1939, 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1951, 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956, 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1982, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991


Under 21
1984 - Present
Champions: 1985, 1988, 2008, 2011


Under 18
Under 19 1976 - 1983
1984 - Present
Champions: 1979, 1985, 1987, 1996, 1997, 2006


Under 16
2024-Present
Champions: 


Under 15
2002-2023
Champions: 2005, 2008


Under 14
2024 - Present
Champions: 


Under 13
2005 - 2023
Champions: 2012


Men's Competition


Premier League
Consists of 12 teams, who play each other on a Home & Away basis covering 22 rounds. At the completion of the season the Minor Premier is awarded the Guth Ardagh flag.
Following the regular season a finals series is played by the top 5 teams to determine the Premier, who is awarded the L.R. Connell Trophy.
Guth Ardagh pennant is awarded to the team that finishes the season on top of the premiership ladder, otherwise known as the minor premiership.


Promotion & Relegation
The lowest finishing Team in a Division or Grade will be relegated, provided a Team from the Division or Grade directly below is eligible for promotion.
A Team can be promoted by being the highest finishing Team in the top four of a Division or Grade, unless there is already a Team from the same Club in that Division.
For the avoidance of doubt, the time at which the 'same Club' rule takes effect is the time of promotion. The effect of this is that if a Team from the same Club is relegated from being the lowest finishing team, there is a vacant position for the Team in the next lowest Division or Grade from the same Club to be promoted into, should it be eligible.
If a Team is relegated into a Division or Grade where there is another Team from the same Club, and that Team hasn't been promoted under guideline, that other Team will be relegated. This process continues until there is a Division or Grade where there is no other Team from the same Club.
If the effect of a Team being relegated as a result of the point above is that the division they were relegated from will have fewer Teams than required by rule 1d (see below) then the Team that would otherwise have been relegated from that Division or Grade due to being the lowest finishing Team will not be relegated.
Rule 1d
The number of Teams and rounds will be as follows, unless otherwise determined by Hockey WA:
Men -
Premier Division One and Two - 12
Premier Division Three - 10
Divisions Four to Ten - 9 or 10


Total Premierships


Challenge Cup
A mini-final is played between the top 2 teams after the completion of round 11, the winner is awarded the Challenge Cup. This competition ceased to be played after 2012 due to the tight schedule.


Champion Club (R & I Cup)
Was a knockout competition open to all clubs across the state. Inaugurated in 1978 and proved to be hugely successful in bringing together clubs from the Perth metropolitan areas with their country counterparts it ceased to be run after 1992.


Year by Year


Awards


Olympians' Medal
Awarded annually to the Fairest and Best player in the men's first division competition. Umpires award one set of votes for each qualifying season game on a 5-4-3-2-1 basis with votes confidentially tabulated by Hockey WA and awarded at the Annual Dinner.


Eric Pearce Top Goalscorer Award
Named in 2009 after prolific West Australian and Australian Striker Eric Pearce. Is Awarded to the top Goalscorer from the Premier League regular season.


Just Hockey Top Goalkeeper Award
Is awarded to the goalkeeper from the Premier League that polls the most votes in the Olympians' Medal.


Paul Gaudoin Youth Award
Is awarded to the player Under 21 years of age, who polls the most votes during the Premier League regular season.  Is named after former West Australian and Australian Captain Paul Gaudoin.


Merv Adams Medal
Is awarded to the fairest and best player from the Premier League Grand Final.


Roll of Honour


Women's Competition


Premier League
Rule 1d
The number of Teams and rounds will be as follows, unless otherwise determined by Hockey WA:
Women - 
Premier Division One and Two - 10
Premier Division Three to Division 10 - 9 or 10) Consists of 10 teams, who play each other on a Home & Away basis covering 18 rounds, 18 matches each. At the completion of the season the Minor Premier is awarded the May Campbell flag.
Following the regular season a finals series is played by the top 4 teams to determine the Premier.
May Campbell pennant is awarded to the team that finishes the season on top of the premiership ladder, otherwise known as the minor premiership.


Total Premierships


Challenge Cup
A mini-final is played between the top 2 teams after the completion of round 11, the winner is awarded the Challenge Cup. This competition ceased to be played after 2012 due to the tight schedule.


Champion Club (R & I Cup)
Was a knockout competition open to all clubs across the state. Inaugurated in 1978 and proved to be hugely successful in bringing together clubs from the Perth metropolitan areas with their country counterparts it ceased to be run after 1992.


Year by Year


Awards


Charlesworth Medal
Is awarded annually to the Fairest and Best player in the women's first division competition. Umpires award one set of votes for each qualifying season game on a 5-4-3-2-1 basis with votes confidentially tabulated by Hockey WA and awarded at the Annual Dinner.
The Medal is named after Ric Charlesworth, Former Captain of WA & Australia, and Hockeyroos Coach from 1994 to 2000, where he guided them to 2 World Cups (1994, 1998) & 2 Olympic Gold Medals (1996, 2000).


Jackie Pereira Top Goalscorer Award
Named after prolific West Australian and Australian Striker Jackie Pereira, it is awarded to the top Goalscorer from the Premier League regular season.


Just Hockey Top Goalkeeper Award
Is awarded to the goalkeeper from the Premier League that polls the most votes in the Chalresworth Medal.


Rechelle Hawkes Youth Award
Is awarded to the player Under 21 years of age, who polls the most votes during the Premier League regular season.  It is named after former West Australian and Australian Captain Rechelle Hawkes.


Shirley Leece Medal
Is awarded to the fairest and best player from the Premier League Grand Final.


Roll of Honour


Ric Charlesworth Classic
In 2020 Hockey WA introduced the Ric Charlesworth Classic, a new domestic competition comprising the top players in the state. The tournament serves as a selection event for the Perth Thundersticks, the states team in Hockey Australia's premier domestic league, the Sultana Bran Hockey One.


Results


Men's tournament


Women's tournament


References


External links
Hockey WA

Hubert Dana Goodale (15 June 1879 – 10 June 1968) was an American poultry and cattle geneticist and breeder. He worked at Mount Hope Farm in Williamston, Massachusetts, where he worked on applied genetics and breeding for the poultry and dairy industry. He developed the idea of index breeding for identifying sires in breeding programs. In 1932 he was among the first to use the term "genetic engineering" at the Congress of Genetics in New York. 
Goodale was born in Troy, Cheshire to Reverend David Wilder and Mary Lydia née Reed. He went to Trinity College, Connecticut, and then to Columbia University. He received a doctorate in 1913 after working at the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory for two years with studies on the embryology of Spelerpes bislineatus. He then joined the Massachusetts Agricultural Experiment Station as a research professor in the poultry department. He conducted staining experiments with Nile blue sulfate to observe cell fates in the developing amphibian embryo in 1911. In 1922 he moved to Mount Hope Farm, owned by Colonel Ezra Parmalee Prentice (1863–1955) and his wife, Alta Rockefeller Prentice, who was a daughter of John D. Rockefeller. Here Goodale conducted experiments until his retirement. He introduced what is now called index breeding, where not only pedigree was examined when breeding but also the testing of progeny. He was able to improve the yields of eggs in hens and introduced techniques for the selection of bulls for breeding high milk-yielding cattle. The sire index that he developed was termed the "Mount Hope Index".
Goodale conducted experiments on sex hormones by transplanting ovaries into castrated male chickens. He also looked at sex-linked characters and the genetics of poultry. He also examined the limits to quantitative trait improvement. Unlike most other experimenters, he believed that there were few limits. He also maintained mice for experiments. Through repeated crossing, he was able to breed mice with a lot of white facial hair. 
Goodale married Lottie E. Merrill in 1906, and they had two daughters. He was a member of the American Society of Zoologists from 1914 and the Poultry Science Association.


References


External links
Mount Hope farm history
Gonadectomy in relation to the secondary sexual characters of some domestic birds (1916)

Idogaya Station (井土ヶ谷駅, Idogaya-eki) is a passenger railway station located in  Minami-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan, operated by the private railway company Keikyū.


Lines
Idogaya Station is served by the Keikyū Main Line and is located 27.7 kilometers from the terminus of the line at Shinagawa Station in Tokyo.


Station layout
The station consists of two elevated opposed side platforms with the station building underneath.


Platforms


History
Idogaya Station was opened on April 1, 1930. The platform for north-bound trains was lengthened to accommodate 8-car long trains in 1978, and the south-bound platform was similarly lengthened in 1987.
Keikyū introduced station numbering to its stations on 21 October 2010; Idogaya Station was assigned station number KK41.


Passenger statistics
In fiscal 2019, the station was used by an average of 29,035 passengers daily.
The passenger figures for previous years are as shown below.


Surrounding area
Yokohama City Idogaya Elementary School
Yokohama Minami Post Office


See also
List of railway stations in Japan


References
Miura, Kazuo (1998). Keikyu Kakuekiteisha to Kamakura Monogatari. Inba Publishing. ISBN 978-4808306243.(in Japanese)


External links
 Media related to Idogaya Station at Wikimedia Commons

Official website (in Japanese)

Inter Press Service (IPS) is a global news agency headquartered in Rome, Italy. Its main focus is news and analysis about social, political, civil, and economic subjects as they relate to the Global South, civil society, and globalization.


History
IPS was set up in 1964 as a non-profit international journalist cooperative. Its founders were the Italian journalist Roberto Savio and Argentine political scientist Pablo Piacentini. Initially, the primary objective was to fill the information gap between Europe and Latin America after the political turbulence following the Cuban Revolution of 1959.
Later the network expanded to include all continents, from its Latin American base in Costa Rica in 1982. In 1994, IPS changed its legal status to that of a public-benefit organization for development cooperation
In 1996, IPS had permanent offices and correspondents in 41 countries, covering 108 nations. Its subscribers included over 600 print media, around 80 news agencies and database services, and 65 broadcast media, in addition to over 500 NGOs and other institutions.


Approach
IPS's stated aims are to present voices of marginalized and vulnerable people and groups, to report from the perspectives of developing countries, and to reflect the views of civil society. The mainstreaming of gender in reporting and the assessment of the impacts of globalization are priorities.
IPS may be unique in its concentration on developing countries and its strong relationships with civil society. For this reason, IPS has been termed by some probably the "largest and most credible of all 'alternatives' in the world of news agencies." It is also considered by some as the "first and only independent and professional news agency which provides on daily basis information with a Third World focus and point of view."


Legal status
IPS is registered as an international not-for-profit association. It has "general" NGO consultative status with ECOSOC at the United Nations, and the OECD status of "ODA eligible international organization".


Organizational structure
Five editorial desks coordinate the project: Montevideo, (regional bureau for Latin America); Berlin-London (for Europe and the Mediterranean); Bangkok (for Asia and the Pacific); New York City (North America and the Caribbean) and Johannesburg (Africa). Most of IPS's journalists and editors are native to the country or region in which they work.
IPS receives funding from various sources: through its subscribers and clients, from multilateral and national development cooperation programmes, and project financing from foundations. It is not, as are most other agencies, financed by a country or newspaper group. The agency's budget is comparatively small for "roughly the sixth-largest international news-gathering organization".


Role
IPS's role is to provide an alternative to sometimes non-existent or unaffordable clipping services.
One study by the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization in 1991 found that of the nearly 3,000 clippings with news agency bylines, 13% credited IPS, making it the third-most cited. IPS reports were collected from 138 publications in 39 countries, more countries than any other agency. IPS was particularly strong in Latin America; 72% of clippings from Latin America with news agency bylines came from IPS.


Notable contributors
Jim Lobe
Fitzroy Nation
Mohammed Omer
Gareth Porter
Don Gasangwa
Mario Lubetkin


See also
New World Information Order
Non-Aligned News Agencies Pool
Non-Aligned News Network
Languages Dilema
Wikidoc IPS


Notes


References
Boyd-Barrett, Oliver; Rantanen, Terhi (1998-10-26). "Defining News: Contestation and Construction: Introduction". In Boyd-Barrett, Oliver; Rantanen, Terhi (eds.). The Globalization of News. SAGE. pp. 173–176. ISBN 9780857026156.
Boyd-Barrett, Oliver; Thussu, Daya Kishan (1992). Contra-flow in Global News: International and Regional News Exchange Mechanisms. J. Libbey. ISBN 9780861963447.
Fenby, Jonathan (1986). The International News Services. Schocken Books. ISBN 9780805239959.
Giffard, Anthony (1998-10-26). "Alternative News Agencies". In Boyd-Barrett, Oliver; Rantanen, Terhi (eds.). The Globalization of News. SAGE. pp. 191–201. ISBN 9780857026156.
Rauch, Jennifer (2003). "Rooted in Nations, Blossoming in Globalization? A Cultural Perspective on the Content of a 'Northern' Mainstream and a 'Southern' Alternative News Agency". Journal of Communication Inquiry. 27 (1). London: Sage Publications: 87–103. doi:10.1177/0196859902238642. S2CID 143515874.
Salwen, Michael B.; Garrison, Bruce (2013-11-05). Latin American Journalism. Routledge. ISBN 9781136691324.


Further reading
Palmer, Michael B. (2019). International News Agencies. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. (excerpt)
Joye, Stiyn (2009). "Raising an alternative voice: assessing the role and value of the global alternative news agency inter press service". Javnost-The Public. 16 (3): 5–20. doi:10.1080/13183222.2009.11009006. S2CID 146268201.


External links
Official website 
Official news website

In International human rights law, an interstate case occurs when one state party to a human rights treaty brings a lawsuit against another state, alleging violations of human rights.


See also
International legal system


Sources
Leckie, Scott (1988). "The Inter-State Complaint Procedure in International Human Rights Law: Hopeful Prospects or Wishful Thinking?". Human Rights Quarterly. 10 (2): 249–303. doi:10.2307/762144. ISSN 0275-0392. JSTOR 762144.
Risini, Isabella (2018). The Inter-State Application under the European Convention on Human Rights: Between Collective Enforcement of Human Rights and International Dispute Settlement. Brill Publishers. ISBN 978-90-04-35726-6.

Yris Jetty Dirk de Beule (born (1996-04-23)April 23, 1996), better known professionally as Irish Bella, is an Indonesian actress, model, and singer. She is best known for her roles in the Indonesian films Love in Perth (2010), and Heart 2 Heart (2010), and the soap operas Jawara, Jakarta Love Story, Rajawali, and Binar Bening Berlian. She was nominated at the Indonesian Movie Actors Awards in 2017.


Career
Bella started her career in the entertainment world by joining a modelling agency in Bandung. After that, she was contracted by MD Entertainment to play a role in the Tangisan Issabela series which aired in 2009. She had a role in the television programme Tiger Boy, which involved live stunts with animals. After taking a sabbatical from acting, Bella returned to acting in films, this time along with her husband in 2022. In addition to her acting, she also hosts a chat programme on a YouTube channel.


Personal life
Bella was born to a Belgian father, Johan de Beule and an Indonesian mother, Susanti Arifin. She started a relationship with Ammar Zoni while filming the soap opera Cinta Suci. The relationship progressed to an engagement on 12 February 2019, and then to marriage on 28 April 2019. Bella gave birth to her first son, Air Rumi Akbar, on 18 September 2020. On 23 August 2022, Bella gave birth to her first daughter, Amala Puti Sabai Akbar. In 2023, Bella filed for divorce after Zoni was released from prison, where he had served time for a drug-related offence. She then remarried in 2024.


Filmography


Film
Bella has appeared in the following films:


Television series


References

Iron oxide nanoparticles are iron oxide particles with diameters between about 1 and 100 nanometers. The two main forms are composed of magnetite (Fe3O4) and its oxidized form maghemite (γ-Fe2O3). They have attracted extensive interest due to their superparamagnetic properties and their potential applications in many fields (although cobalt and nickel are also highly magnetic materials, they are toxic and easily oxidized) including molecular imaging.
Applications of iron oxide nanoparticles include terabit magnetic storage devices, catalysis, sensors, superparamagnetic relaxometry, high-sensitivity biomolecular magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic particle imaging, magnetic fluid hyperthermia, separation of biomolecules, and targeted drug and gene delivery for medical diagnosis and therapeutics. These applications require coating of the nanoparticles by agents such as long-chain fatty acids, alkyl-substituted amines, and diols.  They have been used in formulations for supplementation.


Structure
Magnetite has an inverse spinel structure with oxygen forming a face-centered cubic crystal system. In magnetite, all tetrahedral sites are occupied by Fe3+ and octahedral sites are occupied by both Fe3+ and Fe2+. Maghemite differs from magnetite in that all or most of the iron is in the trivalent state (Fe3+) and by the presence of cation vacancies in the octahedral sites. Maghemite has a cubic unit cell in which each cell contains 32 oxygen ions, 211⁄3 Fe3+ ions and 22⁄3 vacancies. The cations are distributed randomly over the 8 tetrahedral and 16 octahedral sites.


Magnetic properties
Due to its 4 unpaired electrons in 3d shell, an iron atom has a strong magnetic moment. Ions Fe2+ have also 4 unpaired electrons in 3d shell and Fe3+ have 5 unpaired electrons in 3d shell. Therefore, when crystals are formed from iron atoms or ions Fe2+ and Fe3+ they can be in ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, or ferrimagnetic states.
In the paramagnetic state, the individual atomic magnetic moments are randomly oriented, and the substance has a zero net magnetic moment if there is no magnetic field. These materials have a relative magnetic permeability greater than one and are attracted to magnetic fields. The magnetic moment drops to zero when the applied field is removed. But in a ferromagnetic material, all the atomic moments are aligned even without an external field. A ferrimagnetic material is similar to a ferromagnet but has two different types of atoms with opposing magnetic moments. The material has a magnetic moment because the opposing moments have different strengths. If they have the same magnitude, the crystal is antiferromagnetic and possesses no net magnetic moment.
When an external magnetic field is applied to a ferromagnetic material, the magnetization (M) increases with the strength of the magnetic field (H) until it approaches saturation. Over some range of fields the magnetization has hysteresis because there is more than one stable magnetic state for each field. Therefore, a remanent magnetization will be present even after removing the external magnetic field.
A single domain magnetic material (e. g. magnetic nanoparticles) that has no hysteresis loop is said to be superparamagnetic. The ordering of magnetic moments in ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, and ferrimagnetic materials decreases with increasing temperature. Ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic materials become disordered and lose their magnetization beyond the Curie temperature 
  
    
      
        
          T
          
            C
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle T_{C}}
  
 and antiferromagnetic materials lose their magnetization beyond the Néel temperature 
  
    
      
        
          T
          
            N
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle T_{N}}
  
. Magnetite is ferrimagnetic at room temperature and has a Curie temperature of 850 K. Maghemite is ferrimagnetic at room temperature, unstable at high temperatures, and loses its susceptibility with time. (Its Curie temperature is hard to determine). Both magnetite and maghemite nanoparticles are superparamagnetic at room temperature.
This superparamagnetic behavior of iron oxide nanoparticles can be attributed to their size. When the size gets small enough (<10 nm), thermal fluctuations can change the direction of magnetization of the entire crystal. A material with many such crystals behaves like a paramagnet, except that the moments of entire crystals are fluctuating instead of individual atoms.
Furthermore, the unique superparamagnetic behavior of iron oxide nanoparticles allows them to be manipulated magnetically from a distance. In the latter sections, external manipulation will be discussed in regards to biomedical applications of iron oxide nanoparticles. Forces are required to manipulate the path of iron oxide particles. A spatially uniform magnetic field can result in a torque on the magnetic particle, but cannot cause particle translation; therefore, the magnetic field must be a gradient to cause translational motion. The force on a point-like magnetic dipole moment m due to a magnetic field B is given by the equation:

  
    
      
        
          
            F
          
          
            m
          
        
        =
        
          ∇
        
        
          (
          
            
              m
            
            ⋅
            
              B
            
          
          )
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \mathbf {F} _{m}=\mathbf {\nabla } \left(\mathbf {m} \cdot \mathbf {B} \right)}
  

In biological applications, iron oxide nanoparticles will be translate through some kind of fluid, possibly bodily fluid, in which case the aforementioned equation can be modified to:

  
    
      
        
          
            F
          
          
            m
          
        
        =
        
          
            {
            
              
                
                  
                    
                      
                        V
                        χ
                      
                      
                        2
                        
                          μ
                          
                            0
                          
                        
                      
                    
                  
                  
                    ∇
                  
                  
                    
                      |
                      
                        B
                      
                      |
                    
                    
                      2
                    
                  
                
                
                  
                  
                    in a weak magnetic field
                  
                
              
              
                
                  
                    
                      1
                      2
                    
                  
                  
                    ∇
                  
                  
                    (
                    
                      
                        
                          m
                        
                        
                          s
                          a
                          t
                        
                      
                      ⋅
                      
                        B
                      
                    
                    )
                  
                
                
                  
                  
                    in a strong magnetic field
                  
                
              
            
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \mathbf {F} _{m}={\begin{cases}{\frac {V\chi }{2\mu _{0}}}\mathbf {\nabla } \left|\mathbf {B} \right|^{2}&\qquad {\text{in a weak magnetic field}}\\{\frac {1}{2}}\mathbf {\nabla } \left(\mathbf {m} _{sat}\cdot \mathbf {B} \right)&\qquad {\text{in a strong magnetic field}}\end{cases}}}
  

Based on these equations, there will be the greatest force in the direction of the largest positive slope of the energy density scalar field.
Another important consideration is the force acting against the magnetic force. As iron oxide nanoparticles translate toward the magnetic field source, they experience Stokes' drag force in the opposite direction. The drag force is expressed below.

  
    
      
        
          
            F
          
          
            d
          
        
        =
        6
        π
        
        η
        
        R
        
        v
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \mathbf {F} _{d}=6\pi \,\eta \,R\,v\,}
  

In this equation, η is the fluid viscosity, R is the hydrodynamic radius of the particle, and 𝑣 is the velocity of the particle.


Synthesis
The preparation method has a large effect on shape, size distribution, and surface chemistry of the particles. It also determines to a great extent the distribution and type of structural defects or impurities in the particles. All these factors affect magnetic behavior. Recently, many attempts have been made to develop processes and techniques that would yield "monodisperse colloids" consisting of nanoparticles uniform in size and shape.


Coprecipitation
By far the most employed method is coprecipitation. This method can be further divided into two types.
In the first, ferrous hydroxide suspensions are partially oxidized with different oxidizing agents. For example, spherical magnetite particles of narrow size distribution with mean diameters between 30 and 100 nm can be obtained from a Fe(II) salt, a base and a mild oxidant (nitrate ions). The other method consists in ageing stoichiometric mixtures of ferrous and ferric hydroxides in aqueous media, yielding spherical magnetite particles homogeneous in size. In the second type, the following chemical reaction occurs:

2 Fe3+ + Fe2+ + 8 OH−  →  Fe3O4↓ + 4 H2O
Optimum conditions for this reaction are pH between 8 and 14, Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio of 2:1 and a non-oxidizing environment. Being highly susceptibile to oxidation, magnetite (Fe3O4) is transformed to maghemite (γFe2O3) in the presence of oxygen:

2 Fe3O4 + O2 → 2 γFe2O3
The size and shape of the nanoparticles can be controlled by adjusting pH, ionic strength, temperature, nature of the salts (perchlorates, chlorides, sulfates, and nitrates), or the Fe(II)/Fe(III) concentration ratio.


Microemulsions
A microemulsion is a stable isotropic dispersion of 2 immiscible liquids consisting of nanosized domains of one or both liquids in the other stabilized by an interfacial film of surface-active molecules. Microemulsions may be categorized further as oil-in-water (o/w) or water-in-oil (w/o), depending on the dispersed and continuous phases.
Water-in-oil is more popular for synthesizing many kinds of nanoparticles. The water and oil are mixed with an amphiphillic surfactant. The surfactant lowers the surface tension between water and oil, making the solution transparent. The water nanodroplets act as nanoreactors for synthesizing nanoparticles. The shape of the water pool is spherical. The size of the nanoparticles will depend on size of the water pool to a great extent. Thus, the size of the spherical nanoparticles can be tailored and tuned by changing the size of the water pool.


High-temperature decomposition of organic precursors
The decomposition of iron precursors in the presence of hot organic surfactants results in samples with good size control, narrow size distribution (5-12 nm) and good crystallinity; and the nanoparticles are easily dispersed. For biomedical applications like magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic cell separation or magnetorelaxometry, where particle size plays a crucial role, magnetic nanoparticles produced by this method are very useful. Viable iron precursors include Fe(Cup)3, Fe(CO)5, or Fe(acac)3 in organic solvents with surfactant molecules. A combination of Xylenes and Sodium Dodecylbenezensulfonate as a surfactant are used to create nanoreactors for which well dispersed iron(II) and iron (III) salts can react.


Biomedical applications
Magnetite and maghemite are preferred in biomedicine because they are biocompatible and potentially non-toxic to humans. Iron oxide nanoparticles are biodegradable in vivo, which contributes to their suitability for biomedical applications.Results from exposure of a human mesothelium cell line and a murine fibroblast cell line to seven industrially important nanoparticles showed a nanoparticle specific cytotoxic mechanism for uncoated iron oxide. Solubility was found to strongly influence the cytotoxic response.
Labelling cells (e.g. stem cells, dendritic cells) with iron oxide nanoparticles is an interesting new tool to monitor such labelled cells in real time by magnetic resonance tomography. Some forms of Iron oxide nanoparticle have been found to be toxic and cause transcriptional reprogramming.

Iron oxide nanoparticles are used in cancer magnetic nanotherapy that is based on the magneto-spin effects in free-radical reactions and semiconductor material ability to generate oxygen radicals, furthermore, control oxidative stress in biological media under inhomogeneous electromagnetic radiation. The magnetic nanotherapy is remotely controlled by external electromagnetic field reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS)-mediated local toxicity in the tumor during chemotherapy with antitumor magnetic complex and lesser side effects in normal tissues. Magnetic complexes with magnetic memory that consist of iron oxide nanoparticles loaded with antitumor drug have additional advantages over conventional antitumor drugs due to their ability to be remotely controlled while targeting with a constant magnetic field and further strengthening of their antitumor activity by moderate inductive hyperthermia (below 40 °C). The combined influence of inhomogeneous constant magnetic and electromagnetic fields during nanotherapy has initiated splitting of electron energy levels in magnetic complex and unpaired electron transfer from iron oxide nanoparticles to anticancer drug and tumor cells. In particular, anthracycline antitumor antibiotic doxorubicin, the native state of which is diamagnetic, acquires the magnetic properties of paramagnetic substances. Electromagnetic radiation at the hyperfine splitting frequency can increase the time that radical pairs are in the triplet state and hence the probability of dissociation and so the concentration of free radicals. Free radicals in cancer cells induce changes in mechanochemical tumor heterogeneity by modifying bonds which influence the spatial arrangement of molecules in cell structures. The translation of the magnetic force exerted on the tumor and its microenvironment by magnetic nanoparticles into biochemical signaling pathways is known as the magneto-mechanochemical effect. This leads to the formation of regions with different biomechanical and biochemical properties within the tumor. The reactivity of magnetic particles depends on their spin state. The experimental data was received about correlation between the frequency of electromagnetic field radiation with magnetic properties and quantity paramagnetic centres of complex. It is possible to control the kinetics of malignant tumor. Cancer cells are then particularly vulnerable to an oxidative assault and induction of high levels of oxidative stress locally in tumor tissue, that has the potential to destroy or arrest the growth of cancer cells and can be thought as therapeutic strategy against cancer. Multifunctional magnetic complexes with magnetic memory can combine cancer magnetic nanotherapy, tumor targeting and medical imaging functionalities in theranostics approach for personalized cancer medicine.
Yet, the use of inhomogeneous stationary magnetic fields to target iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles can result in enhanced tumor growth. Magnetic force transmission through magnetic nanoparticles to the tumor due to the action of the inhomogeneous stationary magnetic field reflects mechanical stimuli converting iron-induced reactive oxygen species generation to the modulation of biochemical signals.
Iron oxide nanoparticles may also be used in magnetic hyperthermia as a cancer treatment method. In this method, the ferrofluid which contains iron oxide is injected to the tumor and then heated up by an alternating high frequency magnetic field. The temperature distribution produced by this heat generation may help to destroy cancerous cells inside the tumor.
The use of superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) can also be used as a tracer in sentinel node biopsy instead of radioisotope.


Computational modeling and prediction
Mathematical and computational models are used to relate the physicochemical properties of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) to their magnetic behavior. Dynamic hysteresis and linear-response models can estimate energy dissipation and specific absorption rate under an alternating magnetic field as functions of particle size, magnetic anisotropy, magnetization, and field conditions, helping to optimize SPIONs for magnetic hyperthermia. 


See also
Neuroregeneration
Regenerative medicine


References


External links
 Media related to Magnetite nanoparticles at Wikimedia Commons

Ivan Jones is a fictional character from the British ITV soap opera Emmerdale, played by Daniel Brocklebank. He appeared in the series from 5 May 2005 until 2 August 2006. Ivan was originally introduced to participate in a storyline about the character of Jarvis Skelton (Richard Moore) and only meant to feature in three episodes. The serial's producers were impressed with Brocklebank and made Ivan a regular character. The character is a Geordie, which required the actor to adopt the accent. Ivan is characterised as a "good-humoured" and "charming" dustman, while Brocklebank described him as having "quite a few" love interests and stated that he has "slept his way around the village".
It was later announced that the character is bisexual and he starts a sexual relationship with Paul Lambert (Mathew Bose). Their relationship proved to be an "explosive combination" due to Ivan wanting it to remain a secret. Brocklebank has praised his storyline and spoke of his hopes that it would remove the social stigma attached to bisexuality. His sexuality is accidentally revealed to everyone he knows by Paul. Ivan is later subject to a revenge campaign after he turns down the advances of Paul's sister, Nicola Blackstock (Nicola Wheeler). She lies that Ivan has been having an affair with her, ruining his relationship with Paul. In April 2006, Brocklebank announced his decision to leave the serial to concentrate on other projects. The actor said that he had grown "very attached" to Ivan and enjoyed being a part of Emmerdale. He filmed his final scenes in June and Ivan left in August.
The character caused controversy when 126 viewers complained to television watch dog Ofcom about Ivan and Paul's intimacy. The company later cleared Emmerdale of any wrongdoing. Brocklebank said that Christian groups wrote to him condemning him to hell because of Ivan's sexuality. However, he also had letters from young lesbian and gay people who claimed that Ivan gave them the courage to be themselves. Paul Flynn from The Guardian praised his storyline involving Nicola's affair lies. Kevin O'Sullivan from the Sunday Mirror opined that Ivan was clearly gay because he was as "camp as a row of tents".


Casting
Brocklebank was hired by Emmerdale to play Ivan for a three episode stint. They introduced Ivan as part of the storyline about the character of Jarvis Skelton (Richard Moore) getting too old to be a binman. Brocklebank told Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury that the serial's producers did not intend for his character to develop, but they enjoyed his work and kept him on. They later extended his contract to last into mid-2006. Brocklebank found that taking the role gave him a "new respect" for soap opera actors because of how hard he had to work. While the actor is from Warwickshire; Ivan is a Geordie and has the regional accent. Brocklebank had to put the accent on for the role and members of the public were confused when they heard him speak in person.


Character development


Characterisation and bisexuality
A writer from Emmerdale's Finnish broadcaster MTV3 described Ivan as being a "good-humoured", "dark" and "charming dustman" Ivan is revealed to be bisexual and admits his attraction to Paul Lambert (Mathew Bose). Brocklebank told a writer from So So Gay that Ivan had "quite a few" love interests and "slept his way around the village". When the actor first started the role, Ivan was straight and married. He said that it was not until eight months after he started that he was informed his character would be bisexual. Brocklebank, who is openly gay, said there was a risk of himself becoming "pigeonholed" playing a bisexual character, but added it was not something that worried him.
Ivan had previously been married to a woman and he enjoys flirting with females. One such moment is a flirtation with Jasmine Thomas (Jenna-Louise Coleman); they bond over her liking of the Brontë novels Wuthering Heights and Shirley. When Nicola Blackstock (Nicola Wheeler) confesses her attraction to Ivan, he tells her that it is her brother, Paul that he is interested in and kisses him on the cheek. Brocklebank told Laws that he had known Bose for six years prior to joining the serial and was also living with him. He said that it would be "embarrassing" if romance developed between their characters because of their friendship. However, the actor did think it was "great" to be given "such a meaty storyline". Brocklebank told a reporter from The People that he dreaded to think what his grandmother would make of the storyline. He said he was interested to receive the reaction from viewers because "it's a subject that hasn't been covered before". The actor later said that he found Ivan's bisexuality "really interesting" because he felt that it had not "really been tackled in soaps before". Brocklebank later spoke of his belief that there was "still a stigma attached to being bisexual" and his hopes that Ivan's storyline would "break some barriers" around the issue.
Ivan starts to pursue Paul and they start sleeping together. However, Ivan's lax and secretive attitude to their relationship soon annoys Paul. Bose told a writer from Inside Soap that his character is a "serial monogamist" and "has a lot of love to give". Ivan is the opposite and he has "been cracking on to all the girls in the village and Paul can't relate to that". His bisexuality and secretive nature becomes an issue for Paul; Ivan cannot offer Paul "100 per cent – physically, emotionally or spiritually, no matter how much they like each other". Paul attempts to come to terms with the situation and tries to dump him. The next time they are around each other they struggle to keep their flirtation hidden. Bose added that Ivan still "wants to do everything on the quiet", which is a "real hardship" for Paul. The dynamic of their relationship proves to be an "explosive combination". Ivan later has to decide if he is ready for a gay relationship, while Paul weighs up the risks of getting hurt by Ivan. Bose told Laura Davidson from the Sunday Mail that "whether or not Ivan is the one for Paul, I'd like to see him with someone who makes him happy."
When Paul is tormented by a group of homophobic men, Ivan steps in to rescue him. Brocklebank told Kris Green of Digital Spy that Ivan tells the men that if they have a problem they should take it out on him, not his boyfriend. This is the first time Ivan "actually vocalises it" and he is shocked because "he has ever considered anyone to be his boyfriend before". Paul then invites Ivan out for dinner with his father, but Ivan is not ready to come out. The actor said that Ivan needs more time until he feels comfortable with the situation. Ivan's ex-wife Jordan (Erin Shanagher) caught him with another man, outed him and which resulted in a "horrendous" reaction from those he knew. Brocklebank said that this causes his reluctance to come out again because "he's become scared about opening himself up to a new community of people and is worried about the villagers' reaction."
Brocklebank explained the dynamic between the two characters: Paul finds it "extremely difficult" to be in a secretive relationship because he wants different things in a relationship. When Paul does his drag act "Thelma Louise" in the local pub, he mentions that he is a secret relationship. This annoys Ivan and an argument ensues in the toilets. However, Paul has accidentally left his microphone on and Ivan is outed to the whole pub. Brocklebank said that Ivan feels "upset and betrayed" and "deep down he knows he’s bisexual but isn’t sure if a relationship is going to work with Paul" as he cannot conform to Paul's ideas about relationships.


Nicola Blackstock's lies
Ivan and Paul's relationship is tested when "scheming" Nicola attempts to seduce Ivan, despite the fact he is in a relationship with her brother. Ivan is not impressed and rebuffs Nicola's advances. Wheeler told the Sunday Mail's Davidson that Nicola trying to seduce Ivan is a "long shot" but she is not ready to give in because she has a "huge crush" on him. She added that the storyline was "hilarious" and "madness" because he is "having sex with her brother and she's still entertaining the idea of being with him". Once Nicola sees something she wants, "nothing will stop her".
Nicola sets out to seduce Ivan after an argument with her boyfriend Simon Meredith (Dale Meeks). Wheeler told Allison Maund from Inside Soap that Nicola calls Ivan for "some comfort" and they get drunk and "very cosy"; but Ivan presumes they are just good friends. Ivan gets out of the shower wearing a towel and is confronted with Nicola "dressed in her sexiest underwear". Ivan tells Nicola to stop because he loves Paul, but Simon's mother Lesley Meredith (Sherrie Hewson) walks in on them and assumes that they are having an affair. Nicola does not correct Lesley and tells her to believe what she likes and then Paul learns of the situation. Wheeler said that Nicola realises she cannot "get out of the lie now" and even tells her father, Rodney Blackstock (Patrick Mower) that she has slept with Ivan. The actress added that "Nicola's just quite pleased with the fact that she's got her own back on Ivan". He confronts her in public and asks her to tell the truth, but she "turns on the waterworks" to get everyone to turn against Ivan. Later Nicola argues with Paul and she tells him that she and Ivan have slept together many times. Wheeler said that Nicola just thinks "Sod it, I'm going to leave them all stewing". Her lies ruin Ivan's relationship with Paul, who believes Nicola's lies.
The serial later played out another chance for Ivan and Paul to be together. While interviewed by Claire Brand from Inside Soap, Bose said that Paul visits Ivan to give him back a CD he left over his house and "both of them realise that they don't have anything left to say to each other." Bose opined that Ivan and Paul were "doomed from the start" because he needed Ivan to commit. Rodney thinks that he can reunite Paul and Ivan and sets the pair up. He explained that the two had "just about got over their awkwardness with one another" and Rodney tells the whole pub that it is obvious that Paul and Ivan love each other and need to reconcile. The whole situation is "embarrassing for both of them" and Ivan is furious with Rodney's intervention. After some "soul searching", Ivan calms down and "stuns" Paul when he asks him to get back with him. Paul rejects Ivan's advances, Bose said that Paul normally likes "the big love affair" but this time gives him his "marching orders". Ivan is left heartbroken once again and decides to take some time away from the village. Bose stated that his character goes to see him off and there is a "terrible silent moment" between the two. He concluded that the audience could clearly see that Ivan and Paul were "kicking themselves" for not saying how they really feel.


Departure

In April 2006, Brocklebank revealed that he had quit the role and would film his final scenes in June. He told a reporter from Inside Soap that the fact he was originally employed for a guest role; then staying for a year-and-a-half had been "great". He added that he was pleased to see Ivan depart the series on a "high note" because he had enjoyed the experience. An Emmerdale spokesperson added that the character would become "a pawn in the rivalry" between his former employer King & Sons and Matthew King (Matt Healy) and Sadie King's (Patsy Kensit) new business. In addition they planned a "romantic liaison" for Ivan which would be a "big shock to viewers and villagers alike". Ivan departed the series in August 2006 when he left to work in Costa Rica alongside fellow character Simon. Brocklebank later told a columnist from the Peterborough Evening Telegraph that he would not rule out a future return because there was "room for the character to go back". He found leaving "liberating in a way" because he wanted to pursue other projects.


Storylines
Ivan arrives in the village working as a binman for "King & Sons" just after he has separated from his wife. He starts to outperform Jarvis in his new job role and has a fling with Toni Daggert (Kerry Stacey). Ivan takes an interest in Jasmine's liking of literature. He gives her a copy of the Bronte novel Shirley and she lets him buy her a drink. Laurel Thomas (Charlotte Bellamy) becomes concerned and warns Jasmine away from Ivan because of their age difference. When Nicola reveals that she is attracted to Ivan, he reveals that he likes Paul by kissing him on the cheek. Ivan and Paul soon start a sexual relationship; but Ivan does not want anyone else to know about the relationship, which Paul finds difficult. Paul grows tired of being secretive and dumps Ivan. However, when Nicola arranges a meal that they both attend, Ivan and Paul get drunk and flirt. Ivan moves in with Simon and Nicola.
Ivan goes to collect some things that he left behind at Jordan's house. Paul goes with him and takes Rodney's van. When he returns, Ivan finds the van with graffiti reading "ladyboys" and Paul surrounded by men. Ivan threatens the homophobic group with a cricket bat and tells them that he is Paul's boyfriend. Ivan is shocked that he finally admitted it to someone but still insists that they remain quiet upon returning to the village. Nicola thinks that Paul is seeing someone and attempts to find out who it is. She tells Laurel that she still likes Ivan. When Paul does his drag queen act "Thelma Louise" at The Woolpack, he makes jibes about having a secret boyfriend and drops hints. Ivan gets angry and the pair argue in the toilets, unaware that the whole pub can still hear them because Paul forgets to switch off his microphone. Ivan accuses Paul of doing it on purpose, but he eventually deals with being outed.
When Nicola feels down about Simon moving on, she decides to seduce Ivan. He rebuffs her advances but she tells Lesley, Rodney and Laurel that she slept with Ivan. When Ivan tries to get the truth, she convinces everyone else that he lying. Paul refuses to speak to Ivan and makes his father throw Nicola out of her home. She then tells Laurel that she lied about the whole thing. Laurel then tells everyone inside the pub that Nicola has lied and Ivan refuses to accept everyone's apologies. Rodney thinks that Ivan and Paul should get back together and lets the whole pub know. Ivan is annoyed but then realises he is right. When Ivan asks Paul for another chance, he turns him down and Ivan leaves the village. When he returns, Simon is annoyed with him for leaving him to pay the rent on Mulberry Cottage. He forgives him when Ivan reveals that he is just back for his job. He is made haulage manager for Matthew and Sadie's new business after they poach him. However, the job soon ends and along with Simon they leave Emmerdale for a new life in Costa Rica.


Reception
A scene in which Ivan and Paul shared a kiss on a sofa sparked some controversy with viewers. 126 people complained to media watch dog Ofcom deeming the scenes to be explicit. The company later cleared Emmerdale of any wrongdoing, and a spokesperson said that "Ivan and Paul's behaviour was no more explicit than that previously exhibited by other characters in the soap. Given the inexplicit portrayal of this relationship, we consider that these scenes were acceptable." While Andy Green of the Liverpool Echo said "Paul and Ivan's fumble on the sofa was probably the steamiest pre-watershed gay scene ever shown on mainstream TV." Brocklebank told So So Gay's reporter that Ivan's bisexuality storyline had a "huge effect" on the viewers. He revealed that he had received "a lot" of letters from Christian groups telling him that he would go to hell for kissing another male on pre-watershed television. However, he also received many from young gay and lesbian teenagers who had thanked him for "making it easier to come out" because they had someone to relate to. He added that "the majority was very positive" feedback and felt happy to know that his portrayal had helped people face their sexuality.
On Ivan and Paul intimacy, Imogen Ridgway of the Evening Standard said that "Emmerdale was never this racy when my gran used to watch it". She mocked Ivan's plan to keep his relationship a secret because the village is full of gossips. Suzanne Kerins of the Sunday Mirror reported that viewers were "not impressed" when the "bisexual binman" shared a kiss with Paul. Ivan was labelled as a "hunky binman" by Jane Simon from the Daily Mirror and the Sunday Mercury's Laws, the latter branded his relationship with Paul a "surprising Emmerdale storyline". Kevin O'Sullivan from the Sunday Mirror opined that "Paul's reluctant bisexual binman lover Ivan the Terrible Queen is as camp as a row of tents". He added that Nicola was a "numbskull" with a "useless" gaydar for not realising Ivan liked men. Fiona Wynne of the Daily Mirror said that Paul tried hard to get Ivan out of the closet but "he's hanging on so tightly by his fingertips he's going to get splinters".
A writer from the Yorkshire Evening Post opined that Ivan and Paul being confronted by homophobic thugs was a "dramatic moment" that made for a "gripping start to 2006" in Emmerdale. Paul Lang from Lowculture said that he was enjoying the serial because of Ivan's outing. He added that everyone wanted the two men to get together, "even if Paul is a fucking nightmare and Ivan is very much the wrong side of shifty." Paul Flynn from The Guardian said that Ivan was a "hot bisexual" and felt that his storyline with Paul and Nicola was "played without resorting to cheap laughter". Terry Ramsey of the Evening Standard questioned why Ivan even returned to the village after his break. The writer concluded that it was because "Emmerdale is probably the only bisexual-friendly village in Yorkshire".


References


External links
Character profile at MTV3

J.Lo is the second studio album by American singer Jennifer Lopez, released on January 16, 2001, by Epic Records. Lopez began recording the album in April 2000, enlisting producers such as Cory Rooney, Troy Oliver, Dan Shea and Sean Combs, all of whom she had worked with on her debut album On the 6 (1999). The album's title refers to the nickname given to her by fans, with Lopez describing it as an homage to her supporters. Drawing from her own experiences, Lopez included more personal songs on this album, which deals with themes of relationships,  female empowerment and sex. J.Lo is a primarily dance-pop, Latin and R&B record which encompasses Latin pop, retro and contemporary pop.
J.Lo received generally mixed reviews from music critics, who criticized its manufactured sound, while praising its Spanish and dance material. Commercially, J.Lo debuted atop the US Billboard 200 the same week as her film The Wedding Planner opened at number one at the domestic box office. The album was certified quadruple platinum in the United States, making it her highest-selling to date, and became the sixth most successful album of the year worldwide.
"Love Don't Cost a Thing", released as the album's lead single on November 20, 2000, reached number 3 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the UK Singles Chart. The album's second single, "Play", reached the top twenty in most countries, including the United Kingdom where it reached number three. "I'm Real" was serviced to radio as the album's third on June 19, 2001. To further its success, record executives at Epic recruited Ja Rule of Murder Inc. Records to create a remix of the song, "I'm Real (Murder Remix)". The remix, which featured Ja Rule, shifted Lopez's musical style from pop to a more hip hop and urban-oriented sound. It was the number one song in the United States at the time of the September 11 attacks for five non-consecutive weeks. "Ain't It Funny" was released as the album's fourth and final single on June 20, 2001. The album has sold over twelve million copies worldwide.


Background

Prior to the release of J.Lo, Lopez had joined an elite group of limited actors to crossover successfully into the music industry. Inspired to pursue a music career after playing Selena in a 1997 musical biopic about the late singer of the same time, Lopez was signed to The Work Group and released her debut album On the 6 in 1999. Initially, the entertainer planned to release music in Spanish, although Tommy Mottola, the head of Sony Music Entertainment at the time, suggested that she sing in English. Subsequently, Lopez along with Ricky Martin led a large group of Hispanics who had crossed over into mainstream music with English material, including Enrique Iglesias, Marc Anthony and Christina Aguilera. At the time, this was referred to by the media as a Latin pop crossover "explosion" and "ethnic boom". Musically, On the 6 explored a Latin soul genre, and featured Lopez singing about love. It produced the number-one hit "If You Had My Love", as well as "Waiting for Tonight", which reached the top ten in the United States, among other singles. The album itself was a success, reaching number eight in the United States and selling eight million copies by 2003.
In April 2000, MTV News reported that Lopez, who had just finished filming a romantic comedy entitled The Wedding Planner, would begin recording her second studio album after wrapping up filming for another film, Angel Eyes (2001). That August, Lopez told LaunchCast that the album would be titled My Passionate Journey. "I'm halfway done right now. Hopefully I'll have it out by October," she said. It was reported that Lopez's boyfriend at the time, Sean Combs, who co-produced some of the tracks on On the 6, would contribute to the album. Additionally, it was reported that Rodney Jerkins, who produced "If You Had My Love", was working with Lopez. She said "I've grown musically, vocally, and everything" and wanted her second album to "... be more of a reflection of who I am, my own experiences".
The album was tentatively titled The Passionate Journey and set for release in November 2000, with the first single scheduled for release in late September. Lopez revealed in August 2000: "I had a deadline, but then I went and did three movies. So I'd been writing it during the movies and getting it together. And now I'm in there recording it." Lopez eventually decided to name the album J.Lo, paying homage to a nickname her fans called her on the streets since the beginning of her career, "My fans call me J.Lo. Giving the album this title is my way of telling them that this is for them in appreciation of their support."
Prior to releasing the album, Lopez knew how important it was to "stay fresh", wanting to innovate the music industry. She decided to tweak her public image, dying her hair and changing her stage name to J.Lo. The album was released on January 23, 2001. Lopez had more "creative control" on J.Lo than On the 6, explaining: "I really felt like this time it was even more mine." Previously, she had been vocal in living her life while acknowledging her responsibility as a role model to youth. The entertainer stated, "I mean, I feel like you can't take on the responsibility of the world, you know? I think it's destructive [...] You start thinking, Oh God, I have to do this or do that. You have to live your life. I don't do drugs, I don't drink or smoke or do anything like that. So, those are the type of things that people like [in] role models: 'Oh, you can't be human.' You are human."


Composition
J.Lo is a pop album with Latin, dance-pop and R&B influences. Lopez revealed, "I don't think what I make is real Latin pop. I make pop music that has some Latin influence." The album is more personal and romantic than her previous, with Lopez referring to the songs as a reflection on "what I've observed and witnessed my sisters and my girlfriends going through. The songs are about having a good time and not having a good time, or partying a lot and partying too much."
The album's opening track "Love Don't Cost a Thing", produced by Ric Wake, lyrically centers around a materialistic relationship. "I'm Real", composed by Lopez with Cory Rooney and Troy Oliver, has a retro vibe and was likened to music from Janet Jackson's album Control by Slant Magazine. The dance-pop track "Play", produced by Swedish producers Arnthor Birgisson and Anders Bagge, features back-up vocals on the chorus from recording artist Christina Milian, who also co-wrote the track with Rooney, Bagge, and Birgisson. In the track, Lopez pleads with a nightclub DJ to "play her favorite song" over a shuffling electric guitar and dance beat. Telegram & Gazette compared its sound to Madonna. "Walking on Sunshine" was considered a "techno-disco anthem", while "Ain't it Funny" is a Latin pop song that returns López to her Latin roots. Written by Lopez and Rooney, it contains lyrics about "creating the perfect romance in your mind, then facing reality when Mr. Right is less than ideal". "We Gotta Talk" has double-time beats and, lyrically, "prescribes communication and compromise to heal a romantic relationship".
J.Ló includes the Spanish songs "Cariño", "Si Ya Se Acabo" and "Dame (Touch Me)". "Cariño" is described by Lopez as a "cha-cha" inspired composition, with lyrics that refer to love and affection. "That's Not Me" is a dramatic song about self-empowerment with an arrangement consisting of an acoustic guitar and piano, as well as "skittering syncopations, layering half-speed vocal lines over double-speed runs". The album also features romantic ballads, which Rolling Stone and Slant Magazine drew comparisons with Jackson. "Come Over" is a song about "forbidden lust", whilst "Secretly" features Lopez singing about a "guy whom she can smell across the room".


Controversy
Both the original and remix versions of "I'm Real" generated controversy. The original version of "I'm Real" is based around a sample of the Yellow Magic Orchestra's song "Firecracker", using an interpolation throughout introduction and chorus. Tommy Mottola, in addition to being the head of Sony, was the head of Columbia Records, which recording artist Mariah Carey had left at the time. Mottola, Carey's ex-husband, heard the sampling of "Firecracker" in a trailer for Carey's musical film Glitter (2001). According to The Inc.'s Irv Gotti, Mottola knew of Carey's usage of the "Firecracker" sample, and attempted to have Lopez use the same sample before her. When the music publishers for "Firecracker" were questioned, they admitted Carey had licensed usage of the sample first, and Lopez had signed for it over one month later, under Mottola's arrangement.
Following the scandal, Carey was unable to use the sample. Also according to Gotti, Mottola contacted him with instructions to create an additional song that sounded exactly like another Glitter track he produced, titled "If We", featuring rappers Ja Rule and Nate Dogg. The result of this was the remixed version of "I'm Real", which received backlash for Lopez's use of the term nigga. In response, Lopez stated, "For anyone to think or suggest that I'm racist is really absurd and hateful to me. The use of the word in the song, it was actually written by Ja Rule, it was not meant to be hurtful to anybody." Later, Rule was confused as to why Lopez "received flack" for using the word. The rapper stated, "I think the whole thing, like everything else, is being blown out of proportion. She's not the first Latino to use that word on a record, and it's never been an issue before. I think it's just that she's a very high-profile star and it's something to let people get a chance to poke at her." Despite the controversy, J.Lo was reissued with the remix as a bonus track on July 24, 2001. The inclusion of the remix resulted in the reissue carrying a Parental Advisory warning—coupled with the fact that another song on the album, "Play", contains profanity—and a clean version of the album was also issued.


Promotion
The audio CD of J.Lo was "equipped" with special technology, which allowed buyers to access exclusive bonus features via Lopez's official website. Fans could place their CD in their CD-ROM drive of a computer and go to the entertainer's website where they would "unlock" a "secret" area of the site, which would contain the features. Lopez appeared on various television shows and performed live on several occasions to promote the album. On January 12, 2001, the entertainer appeared on Top of the Pops, performing the singles "Love Don't Cost a Thing" and "Play". On January 24, Lopez appeared at the Virgin Megastore on Sunset Boulevard, Los Angeles. Fans who purchased the album at 12 a.m. only would exclusively be given the chance to get Lopez's autograph. Lopez traveled to Australia briefly to promote J.Lo. According to the Sydney Morning Herald who wrote about her visit years later, she arrived in "true superstar style", "Her press conference at the Boomerang mansion in Elizabeth Bay was an absolute circus of beefy security guards (watching over J.Lo's arrival by boat), gushing publicists and one of the largest entertainment media packs I've ever seen."
On February 10, 2001, Lopez was the musical guest and host of Saturday Night Live. She appeared in comedy sketches as well as performing songs from the album, in her second appearance on the television series. Elsewhere, she appeared on Live! with Regis, The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, The Late Show with David Letterman, Today and the 43rd Grammy Awards, among other television appearances. That February, Lopez performed "Love Don't Cost a Thing" and "Play" at a special Total Request Live event, CBS Sports Presents: MTV's TRL The Super Bowl Sunday, which occurred in Tampa, Florida at The NFL Experience theme park. At the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards, held days before 9/11 on September 6, Lopez performed "Love Don't Cost a Thing" as well as "I'm Real (Murder Remix)", where she was joined by Ja Rule.
During September 22–23, 2001, Lopez performed a set of two concerts in Puerto Rico, entitled Let's Get Loud. These served as the first concerts of her career, in which she was, "flanked by a 10-piece orchestra, a five-person choir and 11 dancers". It would later air as a special on NBC. Later, a DVD of the concert entitled Jennifer Lopez: Let's Get Loud was released on February 11, 2003, and was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for sales of 50,000.


Singles
On November 16, 2000, Lopez globally premiered "Love Don't Cost a Thing" as the album's first single at the MTV Europe Video Music Awards. It was released as a single that December. The song received mixed feedback from critics. Entertainment Weekly noted its bold female empowerment message, while Slant Magazine called it a "cheap". "Love Don't Cost a Thing" was a wide commercial success, reaching the top ten of most music markets internationally; most notably reaching number one in the United Kingdom. It peaked at number three in the United States, making it her third top-ten hit at the time. The song's music video was directed by Paul Hunter. It featured Lopez frolicking on the beach after her wealthy lover stands her up once again. Cris Judd, who later became her second husband, appeared as a back-up dancer. Lopez and Judd became close during the video's production, and soon began a relationship after she split from Sean Combs.
"Play" was released on March 27, 2001, as the second single from J.Lo. Although not as successful as "Love Don't Cost a Thing", "Play" still performed well commercially, peaking at number 18 in the United States and number 3 in the United Kingdom. It performed strongly on the Hot 100 Airplay chart, reaching number seven. A Francis Lawrence-directed "futuristic" themed music video for "Play" was released. It similarly featured Judd as a back-up dancer. Eventually, a few months after, Judd would become her next husband.
On June 20, 2001, the Latin pop inspired "Ain't it Funny" was released as the third single from J.Lo. It was originally written for the soundtrack of The Wedding Planner, a film Lopez starred in. However, Adam Shankman, the director, chose not to include it in the film because it had too much Latin influence, and "Love Don't Cost a Thing" was used instead. Although "Ain't it Funny" did not chart on the Hot 100, it was a success worldwide, reaching the top ten in multiple countries, including the United Kingdom where it peaked at number three. It was her second consecutive single to reach number three there, after "Play". The song was used as background music in three television advertisements in Japan to promote the 2001 Subaru Legacy for a special campaign which was known as Three Keys Legacy. Lopez herself was also featured in all three ads.
That July, following the album's re-release with the addition of "I'm Real (Murder Remix)", the new track along with the original version of "I'm Real" were simultaneously released as one single. Two music videos of the song were produced. However, "I'm Real (Murder Remix)" had more of an impact on the charts. This allowed the single reached number one in the United States.


Critical reception

J.Lo received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 52 based on 11 reviews. Michael Padletta was positive in his review for Billboard, praising Lopez for "assembling a sophomore set that's brimming with irresistibly hip-hop spiked songs [...] The result is a set with hip, decidedly time-sensitive feel, which goes a long way toward giving Lopez the credibility she'll need to develop a long-term music career." He also praised Lopez's voice, writing that it "sounds more confident, as she takes more chances with a voice that is technically limited but well-suited to the material she handles". Amy Linden of Sonic.net particularly praised the album for being "a feisty, damn-I-know-I'm-all-that attitude, combined with pulsating, insistent beats that leap out of the speakers and make you wanna move". AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album a rating of three-out-of-five-stars, describing it as "essentially the same album" as On the 6 and was unfavorable of its running length. However, he noted, "it has just about the same number of strong songs, all of which sounding of a piece with 'On the [6]', which makes it a success on a certain level."
Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine named it "a mixed bag: part retro dance-pop, part prescription R&B, and part Latin", noting that her voice "seems best suited for dance-pop rather than R&B and, judging from this album, it's where her heart is too." In a more mixed review, Entertainment Weekly's Tom Sinclair wrote that Lopez "seems lost amid the cluttered, high-gloss arrangements", but stated that she "deserved props" for the album's Spanish language songs. Jon Pareles of Rolling Stone was also mixed, stating, "most of the music sounds like jigsaw puzzles: showers of tiny bits and pieces that interlock as complex, coherent songs." Jake Barnes of Yahoo! Music noted that Lopez "mostly sticks to a successful formula - R&B lite with a Latin touch, but said, "[n]one are great tunes in the way of, say, TLC's 'Waterfalls' but the Bronx born Lopez's enormous fanbase is sure to propel them into the top of the charts." NME's Christian Ward, on the other hand, was negative, calling it "a calculated assault on our post-Destiny's Child sensibilities, an hysterical but fatally flawed attempt to prove that this Lopez puppet can do anything her producers ask of her". Josh Freedom du Lac of Wall of Sound criticized it for sounding to identical to her debut album, claiming that it "stick[s] to the same set of sonic templates throughout the 15-track album, never making much effort to shift up the tempos, melodies, and structures", while Mike Ross of Canoe.ca was highly critical, comparing the music to cotton candy, "made from air, sugar and artificial color".
The album was nominated for Album of the Year at the ALMA Awards, and Foreign Pop Album of the Year at the Hungarian Music Awards.


Commercial performance
J.Lo entered the US Billboard 200 and the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart at number one for the week ending January 31, 2001. It sold 272,300 copies in its opening week, which was described by Rolling Stone as "somewhat modest", given the "publicity machinery behind the album". Lopez ended The Beatles' eight-week run at number one with their greatest hits album 1 (2000). Lopez became the first female solo artist under Epic Records to reach the number one spot of the Billboard 200, joining other Epic artists such as Michael Jackson, Pearl Jam and Sly & the Family Stone among others. Additionally, J.Lo was the first number one album of the year 2001. During its second week, the album slipped to number two on the Billboard 200. In its third week, J.Lo sold 134,000 copies and fell to number four. MTV News reported its sales after three weeks of availability to have exceeded 586,000 copies. The following week, the album sold 130,000 copies, remaining in the chart's top five. For the Billboard issue of March 17, 2001, J.Lo dropped out of the chart's top ten, falling to number 17. For the week of April 7, 2001, J.Lo fell out of the Billboard 200's top 40.
After being re-released with the addition of the number one single "I'm Real (Murder Remix)", J.Lo experienced a boost in sales. It was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of three million copies. For the week of September 1, 2001, the album had re-entered the top ten at number ten, where it remained for two weeks. Overall, J.Lo was the eleventh best-selling record of the year in the United States, with sales of 3.03 million copies. On October 31, 2003, the album was certified quadruple platinum for shipments of four million copies in the United States. By February 2002, J.Lo had sold a total of 3.18 million units in the United States. In June 2013, Gary Trust of Billboard reported that J.Lo had sold a total of 3.8 million copies in the United States, making it her best-selling album.
J.Lo also experienced commercial success internationally. In Canada, the album sold 22,984 copies in its first week, and was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of 100,000. Additionally, it debuted and peaked atop the Canadian Albums Chart. In total, it sold 200,000 copies in Canada, certified double platinum. The album peaked at number two on the UK Albums Chart, and remains her most successful album there, remaining on the chart for 48 weeks. The album sold 27,000 copies in its first week in the United Kingdom, and sold 45,000 copies in the week preceding Christmas 2001. By December 7, 2002, J.Lo had sold 510,000 copies in the United Kingdom, and has been certified double platinum by the British Phonographic Industry for shipments of over 600,000 units. It has since sold over 606,500 units in the UK.
For the week commencing February 5, 2001, J.Lo was the highest-selling album throughout Europe. It also peaked at number one in Poland, Switzerland and Greece. The album had its longest European chart run in France. After entering and peaking at number six on the French Albums Chart, it spent a total of 70 weeks charting, last appearing on September 28, 2002, after two re-entries.
Furthermore, it was Lopez's second album to be awarded with a gold certification for selling over 200,000 units there. J.Lo entered the Australian Albums Chart at number two on February 4, 2001. It remained in the top ten for six weeks, and in the top forty for 26 weeks including re-entries. It was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association for sales of 140,000. J.Lo was certified double platinum in other countries including New Zealand and Switzerland. By May 2001, the album had sold five million copies worldwide. Globally, it was the sixth biggest album of 2001, with shipments of 6.8 million units according to Billboard magazine. By 2011, the album had sold a reported 8 million copies worldwide.


Legacy
J.Lo remains the most commercially successful album of Lopez's career, and has been described as helping establish her as a pop icon. Having adopted J.Lo as her stage name at the time, it served as a "reminder that the mainstream success had not affected her connection with her roots". Several artists followed this trend, such as Janet Jackson with her album Damita Jo (2004) and Mariah Carey with The Emancipation of Mimi (2005). The album's title established Lopez's nickname as J.Lo, a portmanteau which was noted to have started a trend in celebrity nicknames. With the album's release, Lopez continued to transition into a sex symbol. J.Lo has also been described as the "springboard that took Lopez from performer to mogul", allowing her to launch her lifestyle brand J.Lo by Jennifer Lopez and first fragrance Glow by JLo.
The same week the album opened atop the Billboard 200, Lopez's feature film The Wedding Planner debuted at number one at the United States box office after grossing $13.5 million during its opening weekend. Writing for MTV News on the twentieth anniversary of the album's release, Yasmine Shemesh stated: "She's an icon — an important one. And J.Lo, with the reverberating impact it made, was a vital stepping stone in that path: Because of that album, those three letters are forever embedded in the vernacular of contemporary pop culture." Cole Delbyck, writing for HuffPost, also regards the album as "cementing her as a musical force to be reckoned with", describing it as a turning point in her career and personal life.
The release of "I'm Real (Murder Remix)" shifted Lopez toward a more pure R&B sound, with Complex writing that J.Lo led to her "embracing hip-hop adjacent vibes, an aesthetic she'd stick with for the early part of the decade." Speaking of the remix, Ja Rule stated, "It's J. Lo now because of 'I'm Real'. It's gonna put her in another zone. After this one, they gonna be expecting hot crossover R&B joints from J. Lo. They ain't gonna want the pop version of J. Lo no more, they gonna want the 'I'm Real' version." Shemesh stated that the success of Lopez's collaboration with Ja Rule "helped cement the lasting power of the pop/hip-hop composite", and regarded J.Lo as "contributing to the trajectory of early 2000s music". Writing for Entertainment Tonight, Chris Azzopardi also noted that the song "would influence future rap-pop collaborations" and laid "the foundation for Lopez's R&B-influenced music career." The accompanying music videos for "I'm Real (Murder Remix)" and "Love Don't Cost a Thing" are considered iconic, while the latter song inspired the title of the 2003 film of the same name, which featured the film debut of Christina Milian.


Remix album

In December 2001, it was announced that Lopez would release a remix album. According to Cory Rooney, "We had changed the sound of Jennifer Lopez [with "I'm Real"] and we didn't have anything else on the [J.Lo] album we could release as a single. We had to do another remix to keep the momentum going." After the success of "I'm Real (Murder Remix)", Lopez once again recruited Ja Rule for a remix version of "Ain't It Funny". Prior to the release of J to tha L–O! The Remixes (2002), "Ain't It Funny (Murder remix)" was released and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for six weeks, making it one of the most successful singles of Lopez's career. The remix album debuted atop the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 156,000 copies, thus becoming the first number one remix album in the United States.


25th Anniversary edition
In January 2026, it was announced that J.Lo (25th Anniversary Edition) would be released. It features new track "Crazy (Nobody Else)" as well as exclusive tracks only found on international editions. It also features a Trixie Mattel remix of "Play", co-remixed with Drew Louis.


Track listing

Notes
^a signifies an additional producer
^b signifies an co-producer
^c signifies a vocal producer
^d The United States releases of J.Lo feature the explicit versions of "Play" and "I'm Real (Murder Remix)", while most international editions replace the songs with the radio versions. No releases of any edition of J.Lo have an explicit label included on the cover, except for the North American reissue of the album.
^e Second cassette plays the same tracks on both sides. (C and D)


Personnel
Musicians

Production


Charts


Certifications


Release history


See also
2001 in music
List of Billboard 200 number-one albums of 2001


References

John Jay Remsen (April, 1850 – After 1884) was an American Major League Baseball player who played mainly in center field for eight teams in nine seasons, from 1872 to 1884.  He played for the Brooklyn Atlantics, New York Mutuals, Hartford Dark Blues, of the National Association; the Dark Blues, St. Louis Brown Stockings, Chicago White Stockings, Cleveland Blues, Philadelphia Quakers of the National League; and the Brooklyn Atlantics of the American Association.


References


External links
Career statistics from Baseball Reference · Baseball Reference (Minors) · Retrosheet   · Baseball Almanac

The Jackie Parker Trophy is a Canadian Football League trophy that is awarded annually to the Most Outstanding Rookie in the West Division, since 1974.  Each team in the West Division nominates a candidate from which a winner is chosen, and either this winner or the winner of the Frank M. Gibson Trophy will receive the Canadian Football League Most Outstanding Rookie Award. The award is named after former CFL star player and coach Jackie Parker.
Before 1974, the Dr. Beattie Martin Trophy was originally awarded to the West's Most Outstanding Rookie before being repurposed.  In 1995, as part of the failed American expansion, the Parker trophy was given to the most outstanding rookie in the North Division.


Jackie Parker Trophy winners


Outstanding Rookie in the West Division prior to the trophy

See Dr. Beattie Martin Trophy to view other recipients of an award given to the most outstanding rookie in the West Division.


References
2023 CFL Guide and Record Book Archived 2023-06-08 at the Wayback Machine

Jagmal Raja Chauhan (1887–1974), better known as Rai Bahadur Jagmal Raja, was a noted railway contractor, industrialist, miner, private banker, aviation pioneer and philanthropist of India.


Early life
He was born in 1887 in a small village named Nagher, in Kutch and belonged to the KGK community. He left schooling early and joined his father's business of railway contractor at an early age of twelve only. He carried on his father's legacy to become a reputed and noted railway contractor of British India.


Builder, railways contractor, engineer and architect


Railway contracts for railways and bridges
His father Raja Narayan Chauhan was also a noted railway contractor. Raja Narayan of Nagor with Mulji Meghji Chauhan also of Nagor in 1903 together built bridge over Yamuna river at Agra. Jagmal Raja Chauhan carried on father's legacy, who joined him at an early age of twelve to get practical knowledge of building bridges and laying rail lines.
Raja Narayan Chauhan of Nagor father of Rai Bahadaur Jagmal Raja was contamporary of other noted railway contracotrs from his community like Khoda Ramji, all of whom worked in a syndicate and in 1903 while Raja Narain was building bidge over Yauma at Allahbad, Khora Ramji had contract of building railway bridge over Ganges at Allahabd.
Some of thw railway contract works done by Raja Narain and Jagmal Raja are : in 1904 – railway track from Bulandshahr to Hapur, 1904– Shahdara to Saharanpur, 1906 – Aligarh Station, in 1906 – Balamau to Sitapur, 1908 – Allahabad, the Ganges Railway Bridge construction, 1911 – Allahabad, the Yamuna Bridge doubling, 1912 – Kanpur to Banda including the bridge near Hamirpur over Yamuna river, 1913 – Hooghly- Katwa section, 1913 – Jabalpur Gun Carriage siding, 1914 – the Mughalsarai railway yard extension, 1915 – Gaya – Katras doubling, 1916 – Gaya yard extension, 1922 – the Dhanbad railway yard extension, 1924 – Calcutta, the Kidderpore Docks extension, 1925 – Dehri on Sone bridge, 1927– doubling of the Bridge over Son River near Arrah, 1927 – Allahabad, the Yamuna bridge re-girding (in 1911 he had done doubling of same bridge), 1926–32 – Bally Bridge, 1932 Dankuni to Dum Dum for Calcutta Chord Railway
In 1926, Rai Bahadur Jagmal Raja started construction of the Bally Bridge in Calcutta, which he completed in 1932. In all the railway contracts done by him, his partners and sub-contractors were railway contractors from his own community – Kutch Gurjar Kshatriya. The Bally Bridge was named Willingdon Bridge after Viceroy of India, The Marquess of Willingdon, who inaugurated it. The British acknowledged the feat of Jagmal Raja, by naming the first train that ran across Willingdon Bridge as Jagmal Raja Howrah Express. The name plates mentioning Erection & Caissoning done by Rai Bahadur Jagmal Raja, Allahabad, can still be seen riveted on each girder of Bally Bridge.


Contractor for docks
Further, in 1924 the extension of Calcutta Port Trust at Khiddirpore in Calcutta was made by building a new dock named the "King George Dockyard", which was done by Rai Bahadur Jagmal Raja Chauhan with Bhimjee Pancha Chauhan & Mavji Punja Chauhan, all from Nagor. This work was completed in 1927. The dock has now been renamed as "Netaji Subhas Docks".


Architect and builder
Maharao Shri Khengarji III of Cutch used to stay in hotels when he visited Bombay. Jagmal Raja, who was close friend of the king and once ADC to him, did not like this. He impressed upon the king that a ruler like him should have a personal mansion in the city. The Rao entrusted the job to build the mansion to Jagmal Raja, who personally built Cutch Castle in the 1920s in Bombay.
Again, Jagmal Raja Chauhan was one of the persons involved in supervision and construction of Vijay Vilas Palace, built during the years 1920–1929, in which many artisans of Mistri community of Cutch worked along with other artisans and craftsman from Rajasthan, Bengal and Saurashtra.
In 1932 upon completion of Bally Bridge, Jagmal Raja was recommended by the Viceroy of India to the King of Nepal, who needed a contractor of repute to do renovation and rehabilitation of his royal palaces and temples. He was given the contract for the same and Parbat Harji Chauhan, Karaman Devji Chauhan both of Kukma and Manji Shivjee of Madhapar were delegated by Jagmal Raja as main supervisor and completed the work. A team of 200 artisans was sent from Kutch to do this massive job.
He was also involved in construction and erection Darya Mahal, the second monumental residence of Maharao Khengarji III of Cutch, which was commissioned in 1940. Maharao advised Jagmal Raja to oversee the construction but as he was too busy in his other business ventures, he declined to take complete responsibility, however, he sent a team of expert Mistri artisans from Kutch, who worked with other architects appointed by the king.
Further, he also built his personal residential palace at M.G Road in Allahabad in the decades of 1920, which was spread in acres and built like a royal palace, as a replica of Prag Mahal of Bhuj. Remnants of his palace can still be seen in the city.


Industrialist


Glass and ceramics
Chauhan, a pioneer in the glass and ceramic industry of India, founded the Allahabad Glass Factory and the Naini Glass Works, both located at Naini, in 1912. In 1919, his glass factory at Naini was visited by Sir Harcort Butler, the Lieutenant Governor of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. Later he established another glass factory named the Bombay Glass Works at Bombay in 1930 and one more named Raja Glass Works at Sodepur near Calcutta in 1932. In 1941, he was conferred a Fellowship by the Society of Glass Technology, London, for his contributions to the global glass and ceramic industry. Others conferred fellowship with him were John Northwood of England and Pandit Vishnu Datta of India.
He also started a Sanitary ware factory in year 1932 at Derol named Gujarat Pottery Works and owned tiles factory, fire clay factory.


Pharmaceuticals
He was Chairman of Zandu Pharmaceutical for several years.


Airline and navigation
Jagmal Raja was one of the promoters with other Gujarati businessman of Bombay - Haridas Madhavdas, Vijaysinh Govindji and Vithaldas Kanji of a shipping company named Shri Ambica Steam Navigation Company, which was founded in 1945, It operated in the western coast of India an had its head office in Bombay.
In 1947, Chauhan and his partners also an airline company named Ambica Airlines, which was a subsidiary of Ambica Steam Navigation Company, which operated on Bombay – Bhuj – Rajkot – Jamnagar – Morvi and Bombay – Baroda – Ahmedabad air routes. The Ambica Airlines closed in 1949 due to insufficient traffic and litigation.


Coal mines
Like many members of the Mistri community of Kutch, to which Chauhan belonged, he owned a coal mine named Rajapur Colliery near Jharia, which he held in partnership with Manji Jeram Rathod of Madhapar. He entered into coal mining business purchasing the mines in 1913 from one Gujarati miner, Bhawan Kara of Balambha. His partner in coal mines, Manji Jeram died in 1954, however, he carried on his mining business till 1970, when he sold his mine just one year before nationalisation of coal mines in India.


Silica mines
He owned silica mines at Bargad in Shankargarh, the produce of which was used by the glass factories owned by him.


Bus transport
In 1945, Cutch State started its own passenger bus service. Jagmal Raja was quick to capitalise on this opportunity and took on contract the Bhuj- Anjar – Mundra bus route, which he operated till 1948, when Cutch merged into Union of India.


Banker
He worked as a private banker from Jharia with his trusted partner from his own community,  Manji Jeram Rathod of Madhapar, and used to give loans and funding, especially for coal mining businesses.
`


Insurance
He was also one of the promoters and directors of an insurance company named Indian Globe Insurance Company, started in 1929, and he also owned a finance company.


Paper Mills and other ventures
Among his other industrial ventures was a paper board factory at Dahanu named Dahanu Straw Boards, an aromatics unit named Hindustan Aromatics, ice factory, cold storage and export businesses. He also ventured into the packaged food and pickle export businesses.


Personal life
He had residence, offices and factories in Allahabad and Bombay and his personal mansions in both cities.
He shared personal friendship with Maharao of Cutch, Khengarji III and was personal aide-de-camp (ADC) to him in the Coronation ceremony of King George VI in 1937. He was the only person from any community of Kutch, who had the privilege of being ADC to Maharao Khengarji III.  Sir Maharao Khengarji, as a mark of their friendship, honored Jagmal Raja, by his presence, when Degree of Engineering was conferred upon him in London. He was among few persons, who was given permission by Khengarji III to hold a car in Cutch State.
Apart from the Maharao of Cutch, he held friendly relations with Viceroy Lord Irwin, Raja of Shankargarh, Jam of Rajkot, Jam Sahib of Jamnagar, the Ranas of Nepal and the Raja of Rewa, and with several big zamindars of the United Province.
He built numerous railway lines and railway bridges and was pioneer in glass and the ceramic industry of India  and also due to his philanthropic activities, he was given title of Rao Bahadur in 1924 at a function held in Shimla, the Summer Capital of British India by the-Viceroy of India, The Earl of Reading. His construction of Bally Bridge was noted. Although, he had studied up to fifth standard in his native village (Nagor), he had the distinction of being conferred with Degree of AEIE (UK) on recommendation of Viceroy of India, Lord Irwin.
He was also very close with Motilal Nehru and Jawaharlal Nehru and marriage procession of both the daughters of Motilal Nehru – Vijaya Nehru & Krishna Nehru had started from his mansion at M.G. Road in Allahabad. He once participated in elections from Allahabad. His residential palace at M.G Road in Allahabad, was spread in acres and built like a royal palace, as a replica of Prag Mahal of Bhuj.
Besides Nehru family he also held personal relationship with Malviyaji, Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Patel, Lal Bahadur Shastri, C. Y. Chintamani, Dr. Rajendra Prasad, C. Rajagopalachari, V. V. Giri and always helped liberally for Indian Independence Movement. HH Shri Vijayaraji, when was young and yuvraj of Kutch, used to come to his Allahabad mansion, to spend vacation along with his French tennis coach and play lawn tennis in his private court.
During his stay in Calcutta for construction of Bally bridge, through his friends and established in Calcutta; Lira Raja Rathor and Devram Jetha Jethwa, he came in contact with Jeewanlal Motichand Shah, father of Viren J. Shah, who owned an Aluminum utensils factory named Jeevanlal & Company later named as Jeewanlal (1929) Limited at Calcutta. Jeewanlal Shah had decided to close his factory of Aluminum utensils, under the influence of Gandhiji, who said these utensils are not good for health. Jagmal Raja Chauhan, who was among top industrialists in Bombay and had relations with Tatas, Birlas, Wadias, Bajaj, Walchand. He learned that Lala Mukandlal of Lahore was willing to sell Mukand Iron & Steel.
Jagmal Raja informed this to Mahatma Gandhi and also persuaded Shah Jeewanlal Motichand Shah to take over Mukand Iron & Steel Company, so that he can switch over from aluminium into steel business. Jeevanlal he finally purchased in partnership with Jamnalal Bajaj after Mahatma Gandhi's blessings. Thus he was instrumental in helping Jiwanlal Motilal Shah to take-over present day Mukand Ltd.
He was a member of Indian Science Congress Association, Institution of Civil Engineers (Great Britain), Society of Glass Technology, Britain.
His life sketch is also mentioned in Encyclopædia Britannica and Book of World Knowledge.


Death
He died in 1974 at Mumbai survived by four sons, Jairam Jagmal, Varjang Jagmal, Gopalji Jagmal and Shamji Jagmal, who had been managing affairs jointly since decade of 1930–40. His one son Varjang Jagmal Raja headed his Bombay Glass Works factory., whereas the Allahabad Glass Works factory and Gujarat Pottery Works were headed by elder son Jairam Jagmal. Varjang Jagmal was also a trained pilot and a member of Bombay Flying Club.


Philanthropy
He built an ashram with a huge Dharamshala at Jhusi having more than hundred rooms and other facilities near Allahabad on banks of river Ganges. He also built and donated Boys Hostel and Boarding School known as Mistri Boarding House at Bhuj, Cutch his native state in 1932. also built a boarding house for students at Poona in 1940, which was also known as Mistri Boarding House. He also donated funds to start ambulance services and to build hospitals. He has also built and donated a Hindu temple at Rajkot. Further, he instituted several funds for charitable works, education scholarships, starting sports shield and medical benefits. At his native village Nagor in Kutch he had built and donated a huge public garden, a Hindu temple, a housing colony for Harijans, several wells, a chabutro, welcome-gate and also a 10 km long pucca road from Nagor to Bhuj. His ancestral home still stands there. Further, he also offered many scholarship for research. and higher studies.


Honors
Apart from being awarded title of Rai Bahadur in 1923, he was also recipient of the George V Silver Jubilee Medal in 1935 and the George VI Coronation Medal in 1937.


See also
Khora Ramji Chawda
Jagmal Gangji Sawaria


References

Jakub Lando's Tenement House is a historic apartment building at 3 Komuny Paryskiej Square in Łódź, Poland. It was built in 1936–1939 in the Modernist style with elements of Streamline Moderne, a style sometimes referred to in Poland at the time as the "ship style". The building is listed in the Łódź Voivodeship heritage register under number A/129.
Together with the neighbouring Mieczysław Neufeld's Villa and the Szymel and Helena Wileński Tenement House, it forms a distinctive group of luxury residential buildings representing interwar Modernist architecture in Łódź.


Architecture
The six-storey building is positioned perpendicular to the street, with its gable-end front elevation facing the square. The top storey is set back from the main facade and surrounded by a terrace. The facade is covered with a two-colour decorative render imitating cladding made of rectangular stone slabs.
The entrance facade is articulated by an avant-corps containing balconies with semicircular ends. Lesenes divide a narrow window extending through the full height of the building.
The building contains eight identical four-room apartments. The attic originally contained laundry and drying rooms, while the basement housed an underground garage.
The building has been described as "one of the finest works of Łódź architecture of the late 1930s".


References


Further reading
Stefański, Krzysztof; Ciarkowski, Błażej (2018). Modernizm w architekturze Łodzi XX wieku [Modernism in the Architecture of 20th-Century Łódź] (in Polish). Księży Młyn Dom Wydawniczy. ISBN 978-83-7729-440-6.

The Jaliscan cotton rat or Mexican cotton rat  (Sigmodon mascotensis) is a species of rodent in the family Cricetidae. It is found only in Mexico. They commonly have brown fur with white fur on the belly. They are ground-dwelling and prefer open habitats.


Distribution and habitat
The Mexican cotton rat is endemic to Mexico and is distributed along the western coast of the country. This area is located in the tropical deciduous forest biome, and the Mexican cotton rat prefers to reside in the open, grassy areas with dense areas of ground-level vegetation and little to no trees. However, these rats will occupy a variety of habitats when their populations grow in size. The Mexican cotton rat coexists cooperatively with other similar rodents in the ecosystem.


Phylogeny
The Mexican cotton rat belongs to the family Cricetidae in the order Rodentia. While it used to be considered a subspecies of Sigmodon hispidus (Hispid cotton rat), the Mexican cotton rat was designated as its own species after an ancestral karyotype study. The Mexican cotton rat and the Hispid cotton rat can be distinguished chromosomally as well as by different skull characteristics.


Hantavirus
Hantavirus is spread to humans through exposure to rodent fecal matter or by rodent bites and can become fatal. Different species of rodents can carry different strains of hantavirus. The Mexican cotton rat has been found to be one of the more prevalent carriers of hantavirus due its high amount of hantaviral antibodies. The hantavirus that the Mexican cotton rat carries is a unique genotype of this virus, which is also carried by Oryzomys couesi (Coues's rice rat).


References

Musser, G. G. and M. D. Carleton. 2005. Superfamily Muroidea. pp. 894–1531 in Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder eds. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.

James S. Panero (born December 15, 1975) is an American cultural critic and the executive editor of The New Criterion, a conservative culture journal.


Early life
Panero was born in New York City, and grew up on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. He attended the preparatory school Trinity in Manhattan. Panero graduated from Dartmouth in 1998, where he majored in classics. In his sophomore year he was appointed editor-in-chief of The Dartmouth Review.


Career
Panero joined the editorial staff of National Review upon graduation. In 1999 he worked in Gstaad, Switzerland as a writing assistant to William F. Buckley Jr on his novel Spytime: The Undoing of James Jesus Angleton (Harcourt, 2000).
Before joining The New Criterion in 2001, Panero was a graduate student in the History of Art and Architecture department at Brown University, where he was awarded the University Scholarship. His area of focus was late-nineteenth-century French modernism.
Panero became the monthly gallery critic of The New Criterion in 2003.
Panero has written for New York Magazine, The New York Times Book Review, The Wall Street Journal, City Journal, Philanthropy Magazine,  Forbes, the International Herald Tribune, Humanities Magazine, National Review, The Weekly Standard, The Claremont Review, The University Bookman, and The Dartmouth Alumni Magazine. In 2007, he became a regular writer for Art & Antiques Magazine.
In 2013, he was a William and Barbara Edwards Media Fellow at the Hoover Institution of Stanford University.
Panero is the co-editor of The Dartmouth Review Pleads Innocent, an anthology of the newspaper published by the Intercollegiate Studies Institute in Spring 2006.
He is a contributor to Counterpoints: 25 Years of The New Criterion on Culture and the Arts (Ivan R. Dee, 2007), The State of Art Criticism, edited by James Elkins and Michael Newman (Routledge, 2008), and "Future Tense: The Lessons of Culture in an Age of Upheaval" (Encounter Books, 2012).
He is married to the writer and teacher Dara Mandle.
In June 2019, he appeared on Tucker Carlson's Fox News to argue against the metric system.


Exhibitions
"The Joe Bonham Project: An Exhibition Curated by James Panero": wartime illustrators document the rehabilitation of wounded warriors. On view at Storefront gallery, Bushwick, Brooklyn, September 1 through September 18, 2011.


Works
Future Tense: The Lessons of Culture in an Age of Upheaval (Roger Kimball, editor, James Panero, contributing writer on "What's a Museum?") ISBN 978-1594036347
"The State of Art Criticism (The Art Seminar)" (James Elkins, editor; James Panero, contributing writer) ISBN 978-0415977876
"Re-Enchantment (The Art Seminar)" (James Elkins and David Morgan, editors; James Panero, contributing writer) ISBN 978-0415977876
The Dartmouth Review Pleads Innocent (James Panero and Stefan Beck, editors) ISBN 978-1-932236-93-4


References


External links
JamesPanero.com

Jamie MacKenzie (born 8 May 1986) is a Scottish footballer.


Career
MacKenzie started his career with Scottish Premier League side Hibernian, but was released in 2005. He then played in the Scottish Football League for Montrose for a season before signing for Sligo Rovers in 2006. He was briefly appointed club captain following the departure of the previous captain Michael McNamara, who left Sligo to join the Sligo Gaelic Football team.
MacKenzie scored Sligo's opening goal of the 2008 season, but after 13 league appearances he moved to Aris Limassol during the mid-season summer transfer window.
On 17 February 2010 it was announced that he had completed a switch to Galway United. making his return to the League of Ireland.
After a second spell playing in Cyprus, McKenzie returned to Scotland and signed for Junior side Linlithgow Rose in November 2011.
McKenzie was called up to the Scotland Junior international squad in October 2012 for their fixture against the Republic of Ireland.


References

Janneth Peña López (born c. 1961) is an Ecuadorian LGBTQ rights activist. She is considered one of the pioneers of lesbian activism in Cuenca, and in 2011 was the first LGBTQ person in Ecuador to obtain a widow's pension for the death of her same-sex partner.  Additionally, she was a founder of the Ecuadorian Organization of Lesbian Women (OEML)  and the LGBT collective Cuenca Inclusiva. 


Biography
She married at seventeen and had two children with her husband. In 1990, she divorced, and three years later began a romantic relationship with the activist Sandra Álvarez, who was her first female partner and with whom she remained for twelve years. In June 1997, Peña's family found out about the relationship and brutally beat her and Álvarez, so both went to the police to report the incident. However, the police only gave them a distress note and, instead of accepting the complaint, threatened to imprison them, because at that time homosexuality was still a crime in Ecuador, with a penalty of four to eight years in prison.
After this experience, they both moved to Quito and started working in a feminist organization. However, within this group they suffered homophobic discrimination, so they decided to create an organization that focused on the defense of the rights of lesbian women and helped to make them visible. Thus, together with other women, they founded the Ecuadorian Organization of Lesbian Women (OEML) in June 2002, which became one of the first lesbian organizations in the country. 
During the drafting process of the 2008 Constitution of Ecuador, Peña was one of the activists who went to Montecristi to promote the approval of articles in the Magna Carta that expanded the rights of queer people.
On March 22, 2011, Peña's romantic partner, activist Thalía Álvarez, died of pancreatic cancer.  Peña had met Álvarez in 2005 and they had registered a de facto union in 2010, which was possible after the legalization of this right for same-sex couples in the 2008 Constitution. However, she found it difficult to carry out the procedures to be able to cremate her due to the prejudices she suffered for having been a lesbian couple, including during the removal of her corpse from the morgue and the signing of family authorizations at the funeral home. 
In August 2011, Peña requested the Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security (IESS) the montepío and cesantía pension that corresponded to her for having a de facto union with Álvarez.  After a process of months in which she received several refusals, on December 14 it was announced that Peña would receive these benefits, marking the first time in Ecuadorian history that a same-sex couple received this recognition.  As a result of the case, the IEES announced that from that moment on, other couples of the same sex could receive the same benefit. 
After obtaining the pension, Peña moved back to Cuenca and continued to participate in activism. In March 2014, she occupied the empty chair of the cantonal council along with two other activists during the debate on the approval of an ordinance that will guarantee the rights of LGBT people in the city.   That same year, she protested against the decision of the municipality of Cuenca to give permission to walk for only two and a half blocks during the first edition of the LGBT Pride March of Cuenca, which led to the approval of a longer route.
In 2017, together with other activists, she started an initiative called the Legal Patrol, with the aim of exposing the police abuses committed against transgender sex workers in Cuenca. The results of the initiative were presented to the Provincial Court of Azuay. 


References

Jarno Henrik Kärki (born October 13, 1994) is a Finnish professional ice hockey forward currently under contract with ZSC Lions of the National League (NL).
Kärki made his Liiga debut playing with Ässät during the 2014–15 Liiga season.


References


External links
Biographical information and career statistics from Eliteprospects.com, or Eurohockey.com, or The Internet Hockey Database

Jason and the Heroes of Mount Olympus (French: Jason et les héros de l'Olympe, lit. Jason and the Heroes of Olympia) is an animated TV series produced by Saban International Paris in co-production with Fox Kids Europe and TF1. The series stars the voices of Miles Marsico, Pat Fraley, John Morris, Tifanie Christun, Scott Bullock, Frank Welker and Tom Bosley.
Ownership of the series passed to Disney in 2001 when Disney acquired Fox Kids Worldwide, which also includes Saban Entertainment.


Series overview
Jason is a twelve-year-old with fantasies of becoming a hero just like those in the mythological battles of the Ancient World. He is in for a surprise as his dreams become a reality when he climbs to the top of Mount Olympus and fulfills an ancient prophecy, turning Jason into the “chosen one”. Jupiter, King of the Immortals, gives him the Belt of Orion which allows him to exist on Mount Olympus and gives him control of the universe. The evil Dracchus seeks the all-powerful amulet and it is up to Jason to keep the belt and save Mount Olympus!


Characters
Jason (voiced by Miles Marsico)
Mercury (voiced by S. Scott Bullock)
Venus (voiced by Tifanie Christun)
Jupiter (voiced by Tom Bosley)
Mars
Hercules (voiced by Pat Fraley)


Villains
Dracchus (voiced by Daran Norris)


Episode Guide
Orion's Belt: Jason, to prove that he is the Chosen One, must work with Mercury to pick one of the golden apples that are guarded by Ladon in the Garden of Hesperides.
Meeting With Medusa: Dracchus hires Medusa to help him instigate a war between the Greeks and the Trojans.
Jason and the Harpies: A spurned warlock turns all of the women in his village into harpies using a spell provided by Dracchus.
Sea No Evil: A kraken is terrorizing merfolk, who help Jason and Mercury deliver vital medicine to Hippocrates.
Jason and the Sirens: The aging queen of the sirens attempts to restore her youth by stealing the Emerald of Eternity.
No Man's Land: A storm strands Jason and Mercury in an Amazon village, where their presence invokes a curse that brings forth a monster called Zarkoz.
Forge of Vulcan: Venus is captured and put to work beautifying a forge operated by Talos and Vulcan. When Jason and Mercury come to rescue her, Vulcan orders that Orion's belt be smelted into a crown for Venus.
Treasure of Trouble: Mercury's good side is magically sucked out by Princess Anathema.
The Last of the Atlanteans: Pirates steal Orion's belt to fund a search for the treasure of Atlantis.
Unity is Strength: Dracchus has the Lernaean Hydra force an oracle to lure Jason, Mercury, and Venus into a trap in Delphi.
Changer in Our Midst: A captive woman who Jason and Mercury free turns out to be a gold-crazed shapeshifter who steals Orion's belt before usurping King Midas.
Sting of the Scorpion: Jason and Mercury end up in Babylon, where Jupiter's steed, Pegasus, is taken by one of the sons of Nebuchadnezzar II.
Lost in the Labyrinth: A misunderstanding prompts King Minos to condemn Hercules and Venus to the labyrinth, where the two are hunted by the Minotaur.
Indiscipline: Dracchus uncovers and unleashes the Titans, who he sics on Sparta.
Horseplay on Mt. Olympus: Jupiter, in a fit of anger, snaps at Mercury, which leads to Mercury being falsely befriended by a centaur minion of Dracchus. The centaur tricks Mercury into giving Jupiter a cursed tunic which causes Jupiter to lose his mind and weaken the defenses of Mt. Olympus.
Danger in a Strange Land: Jason, Mercury, and Venus lose Orion's belt in Hades, where they run afoul of Argus, Cerberus, Charon, and Echidna, and Mercury loses his memory in the river Lethe.
Sleepless on Mt. Olympus: Dracchus steals a staff that allows him to control the dreams of the Olympians.
The Cyclops: A roc forcibly adopts Jason and Mercury after the two save one of her eggs from the Cyclopes.
Fast Feud: Jason, Mercury, and Venus get caught up in a war between two tribes of sorcerers after being ambushed by Dracchus.
Laughter of the Sphinx: A riddling sphinx, depressed over her missing dragon husband, decides to keep Mercury after he makes her laugh, while Jason is hunted by dragons (including the sphinx's husband) who have been brainwashed by Dracchus.
Close Companion: Jason, Mercury, and Venus need the help of an obnoxious, rhyming guide to recharge Jupiter's Fountain of Fate.
The Pipes of Pan: Jason and Mercury are stuck babysitting Pan's young nieces when Dracchus's harpies attack Mt. Olympus.
Calypso's Challenge: Calypso, enraged over Jason beating her champion swimmer, traps him, Mercury, and Venus on her island after Jason refuses to represent her at the Panathenaic Games.
The Golden Fleece: King Aeëtes tricks Jason, Mars, Mercury, and Venus into stealing the Golden Fleece.
Gaze of Gorgons: Medusa returns, and takes over Thessaly with the help of her sisters, Euryale and Stheno.
Day of Destiny: A year after Jason first received Orion's belt, he begins training with Orion as Dracchus assembles a massive army of monsters to conquer Mt. Olympus. Jason and Mercury's threads of destiny are accidentally mixed-up by the Fates, causing Jason and Mercury to switch personalities and placing all of Greece in jeopardy as Dracchus lays siege to Mt. Olympus.


Airing
In Canada, the series aired on Family Channel.


See also
Saint Seiya
Hercules (1997 film)
MÄR


References


External links
Jason and the Heroes of Mount Olympus at Internet Movie Database

Jay Jason (1915 – 2001) was an American stand-up comedian who continuously performed in the show-business industry from 1933 to 2000.


Early life
Jay Jason's grandparents were from Eastern Europe and Russia. His parents, Lina and Ben, had six children. Jay Jason's interest in show business began when he would imitate the dialects of some of the residents from different countries who lived in boarding houses his parents owned. Born in  Rochester, NY, Jay Jason attended the University of Rochester where he majored in languages. He traveled to Buffalo for amateur shows, and success in these comedy contests led him to pursue a career as an entertainer.


Early comedy career
Barely 19 years of age, he left the University of Rochester after two years for his first major club date, and changed his name from Jonas Levy to Jay Jason (sometimes in the media his last name was spelled Jayson). It was a common practice in those days for Jewish entertainers to change their names, to be more accepted. He performed throughout the Midwest during the 1930s. During World War Two, he entertained for the USO, and during one show, he performed in front of hundreds of Hollywood and night club personalities including Red Skelton and Mickey Rooney.
After the war, he continued to entertain in the Midwest.  In a 1950 Columbus, Ohio, newspaper article, reporter Herb Christopher calls Jay Jason "a rising star," and as “the current Palm Garden Headliner… (he) finds many calls for guest appearances, benefit performances. Local television guest shows also come all too easy…” There are many other media reports of Jason performing such as a 1951 article in the Toledo Blade: “JAY JASON. This well known comedian, who has played many engagements in Toledo and has one of the largest night club followings…" 


Later comedy career
From the 1950s to the late 1990s, Jason was one of the most enduring and recognized performers at Catskill Mountains' resorts. He played frequently at the Granit, Concord, Kutsher's Hotel, the Nevele, The Laurels Hotel and Country Club, The Pines Resort, Raleigh, the Overlook, the Tamarack Lodge, Stevensville, the Windsor, and Grossinger's Catskill Resort Hotel.
As mentioned by Grosswirth, "Jay's name will be familiar to those of you who used to frequent what was commonly referred to as 'The Borscht Belt'". In a Newsday magazine article in 1992, reporter Stuart Vincent mentioned that Jay “is the consummate Catskills comic... You’ve probably seen him if you’ve been to one of the Borscht Belt hotels in the Catskills with your temple, your church, your parents, your cousins. A funny man.  A comic’s comic. An entertainer for 60 years—impressionist, singer, even has a few dance steps in him…he’s played the Las Vegas hotels and Manhattan night clubs, appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show three times.”
Jason's humor had self-deprecating aspects, and all subjects were grist for his comedy routines. He also impersonated celebrities such as Alfred Hitchcock, Jackie Mason, Jack Benny, Maurice Chevalier, Rudolph Valentino, Jimmy Stewart, the Hunchback of Notre-Dame, Arthur Godfrey, and Franklin Roosevelt, and he also did voice-overs for cartoon characters.
In addition to being mentioned as one of the comics who regularly performed at the Borscht Belt, Jason was mentioned on internet sites listing famous comedians, and his YouTube videos are featured on a number of internet comedy sites.
Jason’s jokes were often quoted in different newspapers such as the News and Courier in South Carolina, the Toledo Blade in Ohio, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette in Ohio,   and the Miami News in Florida. As an example, Martin Burden of the New York Post wrote: “Feud-in-the-making: Jack E. Leonard at the Blue Angel and Jay Jason at the Latin Quarter are telling the same quip: I always thought Chubby Checker was a fat taxicab.” In addition, Earl Wilson of the Sarasota Herald-Tribune wrote: “Today’s Best Laugh. New York has more psychiatrists than plumbers says Jay Jason, proving the city has more stuffed-up heads than toilets.” In the syndicated Parade Magazine,  Jason was quoted as saying: “You’ve all heard of kleptomaniacs. Well I know a guy who suffers from mania-klepto. He walks into department stores backward, sneaks up to the counter when no one is watching and leaves things.  People talk about doctors and unethical practices—splitting fees, over-charging, all that stuff. But not my doctor. He’s a great physician, honest, sincere, above-board. He never operatives on you unless he really needs the money.” 
During his career, he appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show, Mike Wallace's Nite Beat, the Dorsey Brothers television Stage Show,   
 as well as radio programs such as the American-Jewish Caravan. He also performed at top night clubs across the country such as the Slate Brothers in Hollywood, the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami Beach, the Flamingo Hotel in Las Vegas and the Latin Quarter (nightclub) in New York City. He also entertained in other countries such as when he performed on television in Australia. He also opened shows for entertainers such as Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong. Jason was also mentioned in the popular entertainer’s magazine the Billboard.  
In the late 1980s, he appeared as the comedy star of Sugar Daddy, a vaudeville-type show with music, comedy, illusion and costumes. In Moore's book on comedians, he mentions that Jay Jason was one of the great comics he would watch at the Downingtown Inn, and Jay’s name was mentioned in a number of other books. For example, Rudd is quoted in Jazz and its discontents, saying that "Comedians are like the jazz musicians of the Borscht Belt, ... then there's Ralph Pope, Jay Jason, Lenny Rush, and Mickey Marvin...they’re incredible. And they do improvise, within a set form. They work with a set number of variables—like a musician would with, say, twelve notes—and they shift the order of things according to how the audience is reacting. They usually start out the same and have a big thing they do at the end that brings it to a peak and lets then bow out gracefully. Like a final coda or cadenza. But in the middle, you never know where they’re going next. That’s the exciting part".


Personal life
Jay married Lynn Peltz in 1947, and had two children named Diana and Leonard. After moving throughout the Midwest for much of his early career, in the mid-1950s, Jay and Lynn settled in Teaneck, NJ, which allowed Jason easy access to the Catskills Mountains.
A number of comedians worked for Jason over time as drivers to the Borscht Belt hotels, including the comedian Kenny Kramer, who was used as the basis for the character from the American sitcom Seinfeld. Kramer is quoted as saying: “Through a friend of mine, I ended up getting a job as a chauffeur for a comedian named Jay Jayson, who was very popular in the Catskills. I used to drive Jay to his gigs, and carry his wardrobe, and I started writing jokes for Jay. Jay is doing my jokes    and they’re getting great laughs, and I realize, hey, I could do these jokes myself. So on November 7, 1971, I stepped on a stage for the first time as a comedian…” Jason's nephew, Sid Roth, host of a noted messianic radio and television show, also drove Jason to the hotels in the Catskills.
Jason was well liked among entertainers. This is illustrated by a newspaper story about his son's bar mitzvah: "The boy’s father is the current comedy star at the Latin Quarter in New York city. Many show business personalities attended  the service, including Jackie Mason, Phil Foster, Norman Dean, Lew Black, Davey Starr, Jack Kahane, Corbett Monica, Gene Baylos, Marilyn Maxwell, Tony Drake, Laura Lane, Tina Robin and Bea Kalmus."  At his daughter Diana's wedding, comedians who attended included: Reginald Stanbach, Lou Menchell, Allan Tresser, Dusty Brooks, Al Bernie and Murray Waxman. Jason associated with other leading comics (e.g., Don Rickes, Morty Gunty, etc.) and entertainers of the second half of the 20th century.


References

The Jazz mugham (also known as Mugham jazz) (Azerbaijani: Caz-muğam) is a variant of a musical fusion genre that developed from mixing Azerbaijani jazz with mugham, typically instrumental compositions with a jazz approach to lengthy group improvisations, often using wind and vocal music and displaying a high level of instrumental technique.


History
Vagif Mustafazadeh is credited with fusing jazz with mugham. Mustafazadeh integrated two different ways of musical thinking by conjoining mugham with rich jazz harmony, fusing familiar motifs with swing, using both jazz and mugham types of melodic elaboration Mustafazadeh learned the classical jazz repertoire from recordings by the help of the characteristics of the oral transmission of mugham. After the death of Mustafa Zadeh, his daughter, Aziza Mustafazadeh made popular jazz mugham in Europe, where she issued seven recordings.
The style reached its full fame in the 1950s and 1960s under the influence of composer Rafig Babayev and his Gaya Quartet. Dizzy Gillespie, the legendary American jazz trumpeter, reportedly lauded Mustafazadeh for creating "the music of the future."


See also
Azerbaijani folk music
Meykhana
Music of Azerbaijan
Culture of Azerbaijan


References

Jaśkowice ([jaɕkɔˈvit͡sɛ], additional name in German: Jaschkowitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Prószków, within Opole County, Opole Voivodeship, in south-western Poland.


References


External links
Jewish Community in Jaśkowice on Virtual Shtetl

Jean-Jacques-Joseph Leroy d'Etiolles (5 April 1798 in Paris – 25 August 1860)  was a French surgeon who studied and practiced medicine in Paris.
He is credited with the invention of numerous medical devices, including a lithotriptic instrument (1822), that was improved upon and put to successful use by Jean Civiale (1792–1867) soon afterwards. He is also known for pioneer experiments involving barotrauma produced by mechanical ventilation.


Written works
Recherches expérimentales sur l’asphyxie, lues à l’Académie des sciences (1829) – Experimental studies on asphyxia, read at the Academy of Sciences.
Réponse aux lettres de M. Civiale sur la lithotritie (1831) – Response to letters from Jean Civiale in regards to lithotripsy.
Sur l'opération du broiement appliquée aux calculs existans avec une rétention d'urine et sur les moyens de faire sortir artificiellement les fragments de pierre (1832)
De la lithotripsie (1836) – About lithotripsy.
Histoire de la lithotritie, précédée de Réflexions sur la dissolution des calculs urinaires (1839) – History of the lithotrite preceded by reflections on the dissolution of urinary stones.
Lettre à l'Academie de médecine en réponse au rapport sur la question de la dissolution des calculs urinaires par l'eau de Vichy (1839) – Letter to the Academy of Medicine in response to the report involving dissolution of urinary calculi by Vichy water.
Considérations anatomiques et chirurgicales sur la prostate (1840) –  Anatomical and surgical considerations involving the prostate.
Mémoire sur des moyens nouveaux de traitement des fistules vésico-vaginales (1842) --Memoirs on new means for treatment of vesico-vaginal fistula.


References


External links

IDREF.fr (publications)

Col. Antonio "Jeff" De Lara Tamayo is a Filipino sport executive and taekwondo instructor. 
Tamayo was the chef-de-mission of the Philippine delegation to the 27th SEA Games in Myanmar in 2013. He is the second vice president of the Philippine Olympic Committee and board of director of Larong Volleyball sa Pilipinas, Inc. (LVPI). Tamayo served as overall security officer of the 28-man Philippine contingent in the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Since 2004, he was the president of the Philippine Soft Tennis Association and in 2007 president of the Southeast Asian Soft Tennis Federation. He was a silver medalist in 1982 in the Asian Taekwondo Championships in Singapore. He was the taekwondo coach of the Philippine Military Academy from 1983 to 1992 and a coach to Ali Atienza and Bea Lucero. He is a ranking colonel in the Philippine Air Force and a former commanding chief of the Presidential Escorts group used for former president Joseph Estrada and former vice president Teofisto Guingona.


References

Jennie Lynn Finch-Daigle (born September 3, 1980) is an American former softball player. She played for the Arizona Wildcats softball team from 1999 to 2002, where she won the 2001 Women's College World Series and was named collegiate All-American. Finch was a member of the United States women's national softball team that won the gold medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics and the silver medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics. She also pitched for the Chicago Bandits of the National Pro Fastpitch from 2005 to 2010.
Finch is ranked in several categories for both the Wildcats in the Pac-12 Conference and the NCAA Division I, where she was named #2 Greatest College Softball Player. She is the National Pro Fastpitch career leader in WHIP and is a National Softball Hall of Fame inductee. She has been ranked by Tucson, Arizona sportswriters as the #1 Best Arizona Wildcats Softball Player; picked the #5 Best NCAA Pitcher All-Time and was chosen by the Pac-12 for the All-Century Team as a pitcher.
Time magazine described her as the most famous softball player in history. In 2010, Finch retired from softball to focus on her family. In August 2011, she started working at ESPN as a color commentator for National Pro Fastpitch and college softball games.


Early life and education
Finch was born in La Mirada, California. Finch has two older brothers, Shane and Landon Finch. She began playing softball at age five and pitching at age eight. Her father was her first pitching coach. Growing up, Finch was a bat girl for the University of California, Los Angeles. At La Mirada High School, Finch lettered four times in softball and twice each in basketball and volleyball. As a senior, she was the captain of all three sports. As a sophomore, she was an All-California Interscholastic Federation Division II choice in softball and All-Suburban League selection. In 2016, La Mirada retired her jersey number—the school's first for a softball player.


University of Arizona
Finch majored in communications.


Freshman
Finch began her career on February 5, 1999, winning a run-rule game against the UIC Flames. She achieved a career high in doubles and threw her first career no-hitter during the NCAA tournament on May 22 vs. the Texas State Bobcats. Though they made the World Series, Finch and the Wildcats were eventually eliminated by the DePaul Blue Demons on May 29.


Sophomore
For her sophomore year, Jennie Finch was named a 2009 National Fastpitch Coaches Association First Team All-American and First Team All-Pac-10. She also threw three no-hitters and led the Wildcats in home runs and slugging percentage and achieved a career best in hits and batting average. Finch began the year with a 21 consecutive game win streak; in a 10–2 run-rule over the Southern Miss Golden Eagles on February 6 to a shutout win over Cal State Northridge Matadors on April 13. After suffering her only losses in back-to-back games, Finch finished the year 8–0 starting a new streak with an April 29 victory vs. the Oregon Ducks that would span the next two seasons. Finch's 23rd and 29th wins were over the No. 1 Washington Huskies, the latter began a 35 scoreless inning streak, after allowing runs in the fourth inning she shutout the team the rest of the way for a 4–2 margin on May 27.


Junior
As a junior in 2001, Finch was again named First Team for the NFCA and the conference, adding the Pitcher of the Year award. She would also hoist the Honda Sports Award for Softball Player of the Year. Finch's season ERA, wins and shutouts were and still do rank top 10 for the school. Along with a no-hitter and career highs in WHIP and RBIs, Finch opened the season with 31 consecutive scoreless innings spanning 6 wins that combined with the innings from her last game in 2000, was a career best 35 before being snapped in the second inning by a leadoff home run vs. McNeese State Cowgirls on February 24. On March 30, Finch hit two home runs and a double in an 11–1 romp of the Oregon Ducks to drive in a career best 9 RBIs, which tied her third all-time in the NCAA for a single game. On April 8, Finch won her third game over a No. 1 team, the UCLA Bruins.
Finch and the Wildcats were the No. 1 seed in the NCAA tournament and made it to the World Series for a third straight year with Finch in the circle. She recorded victories over the California Golden Bears and the Oklahoma Sooners to reach the finals. In a 1–0 shutout of the UCLA Bruins, Finch set an NCAA record with a perfect season capped with the National Championship. Finch also had a hit in the game and was named MVP for the series. The victory extended her win streak to 40 consecutive games along with the 8 to end the 2000 season. Her season was voted by Arizona Wildcats fans as the Best Individual Season for softball.


Senior
For a final season, Finch was named 2002 First Team for the NFCA and the Pac-10 conference as well as Pitcher of The Year and Honda Sports Award for softball. Finch tossed three no-hitters and broke the season strikeouts record, while her wins and shutouts were and remain top-10 school records. Beginning on February 9 vs. the Cal State Fullerton Titans, Finch matched her own record of 35 consecutive scoreless innings that was broken in a 13–1 mercy win over the Northern Iowa Panthers on February 23.


Legacy
Finch set several records in single games beginning with a new NCAA record by winning her 51st consecutive game. A near-capacity crowd filled Rita Hillenbrand Memorial Stadium and chants of "Jennie" echoed throughout the crowd in the 6–0 victory over Cal State Northridge. Finch said, "It's significant and it's nice. But it doesn't even come close to the team goal of winning a national championship." For one of her no-hitters, Finch posted her 100th career victory over the Notre Dame Fighting Irish on March 14. Later on March 24, she struck out 15 of the ULL Ragin' Cajuns for a career best in regulation; the Wildcats won, 7–2. On April 17, Finch won a 1–0 shutout in 9-innings and struck out 19 Oklahoma Sooners to tie a then school record. The Wildcat then beat the No. 1 UCLA Bruins by one run on April 6 to start the year 20–0 and set an NCAA record with 60 straight wins dating back to the 2000 season, including four wins over the No. 1 ranked team. To open a return trip to the WCWS as defending champion, Finch shutout the Nebraska Cornhuskers and ended the game with her 1,000th career strikeout. In the semifinals of the World Series, Finch hit her 50th career home run off Leslie Malerich to score the winning run and help herself beat the FSU Seminoles in 11-innings. The Wildcats suffered a 6–0 loss in the championship to the California Golden Bears.
Finch left the program the career leader in strikeouts, shutouts, innings pitched and tied for no-hitters (8), while ranking in the top-10 in most other pitching categories. She also was top-10 in home runs, RBIs and walks; she remains top-10 in several pitching and the walks all-time lists. She currently is 6th and 7th in winning percentage (0.881%) for a career in the now-named Pac-12 and the NCAA.
Finch's prolific career at the WCWS included appearances all four years with the Wildcats and included a 7–2 record, 70 strikeouts, three shutouts, allowing 17 earned runs, 41 hits and 27 walks for 1.83 ERA and 1.04 WHIP in 65.0 innings. At the plate she also contributed 5 hits, a home run and two walks.
Her jersey number, 27 (the date of her parents' first date), was retired by the University of Arizona in a pre-game ceremony at Hillenbrand Stadium on May 9, 2003.


2004 Olympics
Finch was a member of the USA softball team at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens. As a pitcher she posted a 2–0 win–loss record striking out 13 batters in eight innings while giving up only one hit, one walk and no runs. Her pitching helped lead the American team to the gold medal.


2008 Olympics
The USA team started its bid for a fourth straight gold medal at the 2008 Olympic games in Beijing with Finch pitching four no-hit innings in an 11–0 victory over Venezuela. Finch then pitched 5 shutout innings in a 7–0 victory over Chinese Taipei and two more shut out innings in a 9–0 victory over China. However, the U.S. lost 3–1 to Japan in the final game and came home with a silver medal. After the loss, Finch said, "I feel like we let USA softball down. Many women have worn this uniform, and accepted nothing but gold." Along with baseball, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) decided in 2005 to drop softball from the Olympics, making 2008 possibly the last time the sport is played in the Olympics, before it will be reinstated in 2020. A crusader for softball's reinstatement for the 2016 Olympics, Finch said that "[i]t deserves to be an Olympic sport." After the final game, Finch said:

Over 140 countries play this game. ... you don't have to be six-four. You don't have to be 200 pounds. We have all different shapes and sizes. The sport tests so many athletic abilities, from hand-eye coordination, to speed, to agility, to quickness. We're finally at the pinnacle, we've finally been established. Please don't take this away.


National Pro Fastpitch
Finch pitched for the Chicago Bandits of the National Pro Fastpitch (NPF) softball league. She was named NPF's Co-Pitcher of the Year in 2005, sharing the award with teammate Lauren Bay. She also threw her first career no-hitter in a win over the Stratford Brakettes that same year. With a perfect season, Finch extended the streak in 2006 before opening 2007 with a loss. Finch won 15 consecutive games with 104.1 innings pitched, allowing 51 hits, 12 earned runs, 21 walks and whiffing 127 batters to post a 0.80 ERA and 0.69 WHIP.
Finch holds the league's season ERA crown, which she set in 2007. On May 29, in a 1–0 12-inning loss to the Rockford Thunder, Finch struck out 17 and combined with Cat Osterman for a total of 41 strikeouts to set a single-game record for the combined total. On August 1, she set a career high with 16 strikeouts in a regulation win against the Michigan Ice. August 15, she set a career best with 18 more strikeouts to defeat the Rockford Thunder in 9-innings.
She pitched a perfect game for the Bandits in 2009 against the Philadelphia Force and another perfect game on July 9, 2010 against the Akron Racers. That year, Finch was named All-NPF. Finch currently leads in career WHIP and is top-10 all-time in strikeouts, ERA, strikeout ratio and fielding percentage. The Chicago Bandits played their home games in Rosemont, Illinois, at 27 Jennie Finch Way where her jersey is also retired.


Manager
On May 29, 2016, Finch was the guest manager of the Atlantic League's Bridgeport Bluefish for the day, thus becoming the first woman to manage a professional baseball team. The team played and won one game.


Media

In 2002, ESPN called Finch the "runaway winner" of the Best Dressed competition at the Excellence in Sports Performance Yearly Awards.
In 2003, Finch received the most votes in an ESPN online poll as the most attractive female athlete.
In 2004, People magazine named Finch one of its "50 Most Beautiful People", the only female athlete in the list. "This is truly amazing to be recognized by People magazine for this honor," Finch said. "It is really special to be included among some of the most famous and beautiful people in the world. I still have a hard time believing that I was selected as part of this group." Finch also appeared in an episode of season 5 of the TV series The Parkers.
Finch has modeled swimwear for the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Edition in 2005. Finch was offered lucrative contracts to disrobe for Playboy and Maxim magazine, but turned them down.
This Week in Baseball signed Finch as a co-host. In a segment called the Jennie Challenge, Finch pitches to Major League Baseball players and often strikes them out. In softball, the mound is closer to home plate than baseball and Finch's pitches are the equivalent of a 98 mph pitch. "Some big-timers refuse to face her," Cal Ripken Jr. says. "Many feel it could be embarrassing." In an interview with ESPN, Finch explained, "I was throwing them mostly rise balls and change-ups. They've never seen a pitch like that, you know? With the closer distance from the mound, I think it really surprises them how fast the pitch gets there. And especially with the rise – when they're used to that over-the-top release point – there is nothing else like it. The ball movement throws them off."
In the 2004 Pepsi All-Star Softball Game, Finch struck out Albert Pujols, Mike Piazza and Brian Giles. "I never touched a pitch," said Giles. "Her fastball was the fastest thing I've ever seen, from that distance. It rises and cuts at the same time."
In 2006, Finch appeared in Season One of Pros vs Joes on Spike TV, a show in which sports stars compete with ordinary people. She was the first woman to appear on the show.
Finch appeared on an episode of The Real Housewives of Orange County.
In 2008, Finch was featured as a contestant on The Celebrity Apprentice where she selected International Breast Cancer Research Foundation as her charity. She was fired by Donald Trump in the fourth week of the season.
In 2008, Finch also served as the Grand Marshal of the nationally televised McDonald's Thanksgiving Parade in downtown Chicago.
Finch pitched for the National League in the 2010 Legends and Celebrities Softball Game, at Angel Stadium, the 2011 game at Chase Field, and the 2015 game at Great American Ballpark in Cincinnati, in 2017 at Marlins Park in Miami, and in 2018 at Nationals Park in Washington.
In 2011, Finch co-authored Throw Like a Girl: How to Dream Big and Believe in Yourself, with Ann Killion. The book is a collection of life lessons Finch learned growing up playing sports. On November 6, 2011, just four and a half months after giving birth to son Diesel, Finch finished the New York Marathon with a time of 4:05:26, raising $30,000 for the New York Road Runners Youth Program.
In April 2018, Finch was announced as one of the celebrities who will compete on season 26 of Dancing with the Stars. She was partnered with professional dancer Keo Motsepe.
In 2021, Finch was featured in MLB The Show 21 in Road To The Show storyline of her being a former two-way player.


Personal life
Finch married Major League Baseball pitcher Casey Daigle on January 15, 2005. Daigle proposed to Finch on the softball field at the University of Arizona, her alma mater. According to Finch, "He blindfolded me and took me to the mound and said, 'You have been the queen of the diamond for four years. Now I want you to be the queen of my heart.'" They have two sons; Ace Shane, born on May 4, 2006 and Diesel Dean, born on June 19, 2011. Finch welcomed her daughter Paisley Faye on January 12, 2013.
Finch is an avid fan of the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Finch is a Christian. Finch turned down large financial offers to appear in magazines like Playboy because of her Christian faith, saying she wanted to be a role model for young women. Finch has spoken about her faith, saying: "It's so important to find hope in [Jesus] and live for a higher purpose: to share about Him." Finch cited her Christian faith while on the show Dancing with the Stars when she refused to dance to a Janelle Monáe song because she deemed it too risqué.


Retirement
On July 20, 2010, age 29 and still dominating the sport, Finch announced her retirement from softball to focus on her family. "I just feel like it gets harder and harder every year with Ace getting older and time away from my husband and even family events such as birthdays and friends' weddings and things that I've always just missed out on because of softball," Finch said in an interview with the Associated Press. Said Finch, "This whole career has been way more than I ever even imagined or dreamed. The opportunities that I'd be able to enjoy and appreciate and be a part of, it's been incredible." In her final start with the US National Team, Finch struck out 12, only allowing three singles, two of those infield hits. She continued playing with the Chicago Bandits until the National Pro Fastpitch season ended in August. 
Finch was considered the most dominant and recognizable softball pitcher of her era. "She set the standard for softball in a new era of being able to be feminine and play this sport," U.S. outfielder Jessica Mendoza said. "Not that you have to be feminine to play this sport, but I see hundreds of thousands of little girls now with glitter headbands, hot pink bats, makeup. ... when I was growing up, it wasn't like that." According to Mike Candrea, her coach at Arizona and through two Olympics, "Jennie has transformed this sport, touched millions of young kids in many different ways – whether it's fashion, whether it's the way she plays the game – but through it all she's been very humble." A Chicago Tribune editorial commented, "She leaves with a spotless personal reputation, an intent to keep promoting softball, and the knowledge that she has inspired other girls and women who play for the love of the game."


Career statistics


See also
Women in baseball


References


External links

Official website 
Jennie Finch at IMDb 
Jennie Finch Archived March 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine at USA Softball
Jennie Finch at Team USA (archive May 10, 2023)
Jennie Finch-Daigle at Team USA (archived September 7, 2014)
Jennie Finch at Olympics.com 
Jennie Finch at Olympedia

Jessica Louise Cutler (born May 18, 1978) is an American blogger, author, and former congressional staff assistant who was fired for detailing her active sexual life, including receiving money for having sex (prostitution), in her blog.


Career


Education
Cutler was born on May 18, 1978, in Monterey, California. She attended Syracuse University, and was a photo editor at the student newspaper, The Daily Orange.


Washingtonienne
In 2004, while a staff assistant for Senator Mike DeWine, Cutler published a short-lived blog called Washingtonienne describing her life in Washington, D.C. which included graphic details of her sex life.
Cutler justified receiving money from her lovers by saying, "I'm sure I am not the only one who makes money on the side this way: How can anybody live on $25K/year??"
Her identity was revealed by the blog "Wonkette" in May 2004, which resulted in a scandal on Capitol Hill.
On May 21, 2004, Cutler was fired for "unacceptable use of Senate computers" by Senator DeWine.  Media treatment of Cutler was harsh, the Philadelphia Daily News going so far as to label her a "DC slut". Cutler, though, has been relatively accepting of her notoriety:

Public embarrassment is really very liberating. You really stop caring about what people think, which is something only the elderly seem to able to accomplish with great aplomb. So I am way ahead of everybody. And those of you behind me can kiss my ass.
In summer 2004, Playboy.com featured an interview and nude pictures of Cutler.
She wrote a novel based on her experiences and blog: The Washingtonienne: A Novel, selling it for a reported $300,000. A reviewer for the Washington Post wrote, "The Washingtonienne gives hints of being lively, funny and agreeably in-your-face." Judy Bachrach of The Weekly Standard wrote, "This is a novel of uncommon candor, humor, and perspicacity, and I loved every page of it."


Steinbuch lawsuit
In June 2005, Robert Steinbuch, who says that he is the person Cutler referred to as "RS" on her blog, filed a lawsuit against her, seeking over $75,000 in damages. Steinbuch's complaint and related filings, filed in federal court in Washington, D.C., describe the case as for "defamation," "false light," "invasion of privacy for public revelation of private facts," the "intentional infliction of emotional distress," and "other causes of action." Cutler is represented by Atlanta lawyer, Matthew C. Billips, and D.C. lawyer, John R. Ates. On May 30, 2007, Cutler filed for bankruptcy in an attempt to protect herself from potential debts. Listed among potential creditors were some of her former attorneys, as well as Steinbuch. At the time she filed for bankruptcy, staying the case in the DC District Court, a motion to dismiss—as a sanction against Steinbuch for refusing to comply with Court Ordered discovery—was still pending.
Steinbuch also filed a $20 million suit against her in Arkansas, where he lives and works as a law professor. The lawsuit was eyed closely by privacy groups because it could establish whether bloggers are obligated to protect the privacy of those they name in their online public blogs. The Arkansas case was dismissed for forum non-conveniens by the district court. However, the United States Court of Appeals reversed the district judge in Arkansas, holding that he abused his discretion and ruled incorrectly. Eventually, after the case was sent back to the district judge in Arkansas, the district judge transferred the case to another judge.
It was reported in 2007 that cable television channel HBO and entertainment company Disney, whom Steinbuch also sued, are working on a TV series about Cutler's story.
According to the New York Law Journal, Steinbuch was ordered to reimburse discovery expenses regarding a deposition to Cutler's attorney Billips in June 2009. Billips has filed an affidavit requesting over $14,000 in fees and expenses.


Personal life
In 2008, she married Charles Rubio, a lawyer, in New York City. She gave birth in August 2009 to a daughter, Jessica-Louise.


Books
The Washingtonienne: A Novel.  Hyperion Books (2005).  Hardcover: ISBN 978-1-4013-0200-9, ISBN 978-1-4013-0847-6.
Sexe au Capitole.  Plon (2006).  ISBN 978-2-259-20172-8.


References


External links

New York Times book review
Weekly Standard book review
Washington Post book review

Jessica Daves (February 20, 1898 – September 22, 1974) was an American writer and editor. She is best known for serving as the editor-in-chief of Vogue magazine, from 1952 to 1962.


Biography
Daves was born in Cartersville, Georgia, in 1898, but moved to New York City, in 1921, where she worked in the advertising industry. She first started to work as a fashion merchandising editor at Vogue in 1933, and was promoted to managing editor in 1936. In 1952, she became editor-in-chief of Vogue and later retired in 1963.
She is distinctly known for the promotion of American ready-to-wear during her time at the magazine. A fashion writer noted, "She spotted the trend, and her major fashion impact was to make ready‐to‐wear chic."
She wrote or co-wrote three books: The Vogue Book of Menus, Ready‐Made Miracle: The Story of American Fashion for the 'Millions' and The World in Vogue. In 2019, fashion historian Rebecca Tuite published an account of her Vogue editorship,1950s in Vogue: The Jessica Daves Years, 1952-1962.


References

Jesús Emilio Ramírez González (1904–1981) was a Colombian geophysicist and seismologist. Born in Yolombó, Antioquia, he earned a M.S. (1931) and PhD (1939) at Saint Louis University under James B. Macelwane. In the late 1930, he and Macelwane invented a system with that was able to track storms out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean using seismographs.  He was able to show that "microseisms were traveling, rather than standing waves and that their origins could be traced to storms at sea". With Spanish meteorologist Simón Sarasola he co-founded the Geophysical Institute of the Colombian Andes and was its director for 38 years.  He was a president of the Academia Colombiana de Ciencias Exactas and the Centro Regional de Sismologia de America del Sur (CERESIS) The Jesús Emilio Ramírez González Planetarium of Medellín is named for him.


References

Jhalawad may refer to the following entities in India :

Jhalawar, a city in Rajasthan
Jhalawar district, a district in Rajasthan
Jhalawar State, former princely state in Hadoti region of Rajasthan
Jhalawar City railway station
Jhalawar Road railway station
Jhalawar Lok Sabha constituency (defunct)
Jhalawar–Baran Lok Sabha constituency
Jhalawad, a town in Gujarat
Kingdom of Jhalavad the former princely state in Gujarat, which was renamed Dhrangadhra State after its capital was transferred
Jhalawad prant, one of the ten historical and for British Raj-preserved prants (regions) of Kathiawar, along Halar, Sorath and Gohelwad
hence still nickname of Surendranagar district, also in Gujarat, as many of its princely states


See also
Jwala (disambiguation)
Jala (disambiguation)
Jhala, fast-paced conclusions of raga in Hindustani classical music
Jhala (clan), a Rajput clan of Rajasthan and Gujarat, India
Wad (disambiguation)
Wada (disambiguation)
Jhalarapatan, a city in Rajasthan
Jhalar, Indian decorative fabric strip
Jhalwara railway station, Madhya Pradesh, India

Jim Hunter was a British boxer who was Scottish lightweight champion between 1930 and 1933. He held residence in Dunfermline, Scotland.


Career
Jim Hunter made his professional boxing debut in 1919, defeating fellow debutant Billy Jones by KO. Hunter defeated Alistair McInroy in 1930 to become Scottish area lightweight. He went on to fight Johnny Cuthbert for the British lightweight title in 1932 at the White City Stadium in Glasgow but lost by KO in the tenth round. In 1933 he lost the Scottish lightweight title to Tommy Spiers in a rematch.
His last fight was in 1934, losing to Pat Slavin by points.


References


External links
Scotland Area Title Bouts 1929-79 at boxinghistory.org.uk
Boxing record for Jim Hunter from BoxRec (registration required)

Jimmy Walker is a male former international table tennis player from England. He started playing at Ormesby table tennis club and was a member of the European Club Championship winning team in 1972.
As a junior he reached the final of the English Junior Open beating the top seed Ingemar Vikstrom in the semi-final, only to lose in the final to Manfred Baum of Germany. He was also a member of the bronze medal winning team in the European Junior Championships in Ostend, Belgium in 1971.
Career highlights:- Commonwealth Championships - Gold medal in team event in Melbourne, Australia 1975, Siver medal in team event Guernsey 1977, 1 gold and 3 silver medals in Scotland 1979 - gold in the mixed doubles and silver in the men's team event, men's singles and men's doubles 
Winner of men's singles Lisbon Open 1973 
Twice winner of men's singles Scottish Open 
Winner of Irish Open men's singles 1979 and twice winner of Irish Open mixed doubles with his wife, Irish International Karen Walker (nee Senior) 


Table tennis career
He represented England at the 1975 World Table Tennis Championships in the Swaythling Cup (men's team event) with Desmond Douglas, Nicky Jarvis, Denis Neale and Trevor Taylor.
He won the English National Table Tennis Championships men's doubles title in 1979 with Desmond Douglas.


Personal life
He married Karen Senior, a table tennis player formerly ranked number one in Ireland.


See also
List of England players at the World Team Table Tennis Championships


References

Joseph G. Glaser (December 17, 1896 – June 6, 1969) was an artist manager known for his involvement in the careers of jazz musicians, including Louis Armstrong and Billie Holiday.


Biography
Glaser was the son of a Chicago family of Russian Jewish origins. Beginning in the 1910s Glaser owned a number of used car dealerships. One of his employees was Roger Touhy, who went on to become an infamous mob boss. Later Glaser would use his connections with Touhy to come into ownership of a chain of brothels, Glaser bragged that "I was practically a kid and I had the biggest chain of whorehouses on the South Side of Chicago". When asked how he got into show business he would say "on account of the whorehouses".
In the 1920s he became manager of the Sunset Cafe nightclub. The club was a hang-out of Al Capone and his associates, along with being associated with bootlegging. Capone was a silent partner in the Sunset Cafe, and also in the Dreamland Ballroom, which Glaser managed too. In January 1927 Glaser was convicted and fined $100 for operating a "disorderly house", i.e. a brothel. On 25 February of that same year Glaser was arrested for the rape of a 14 year old girl named Delores Wheeler. He was found guilty and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. However Glaser filed an appeal and in June 1929 the Illinois Supreme Court reversed the original decision. After his first arrest, he was again arrested for sexual assault of a minor, seventeen year old Virginia Hill. 
He briefly worked as a Music Corporation of America (MCA) agent in the 1930s. He started managing Louis Armstrong in May 1935. The success of their association caused other jazz musicians to join Glaser and his agency known as the Associated Booking Corporation which "was formed in 1940 by Joe Glaser and Louis Armstrong" with the help of a loan from Jules C. Stein. The relation of Glaser and Armstrong has been represented as a prominent element in Terry Teachout's theater play Satchmo at the Waldorf. Armstrong dedicated his book Selected Writings to Glaser writing "I dedicated this book to my manager and pal, Joe Glaser, the best Friend I've ever had". 
In 1962 Glaser reached an agreement with Sidney Korshak whereby he assigned all of the "voting rights, dominion and control" of his majority stock in the company to both Korshak and himself. This meant that when Glaser died in 1969 control transferred to Korshak alone. Glaser designated Korshak as the executor of his probate. It was through Glaser that Korshak and MCA's Jules C. Stein were introduced.
Although his clients had a high opinion of him, Glaser was a feared person in the business industry. Associated Booking Corporation, or "ABC" as it is also known, was incorporated on June 26, 1943, and is still in existence today. It has represented Duke Ellington, Benny Goodman, Lionel Hampton, Woody Herman, Dave Brubeck, Barbra Streisand, B.B. King, The Allman Brothers Band, T. Rex, The Platters and many others.


Death
Glaser died in June 1969, at Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital in New York City after suffering a stroke. He was 72.


FBI file
After his death in 1969, Glaser's FBI file – CR 166-1672 – was shipped over to the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations sometime between its start in 1976 and its final report in 1979. While the file was sent to the committee in the belief that Glaser had known Jack 'Sparky' Rubenstein (better known as Jack Ruby) from his Chicago days, that file revealed that Glaser was still doing some boxing promotion as late as 1966, representing Ernie Terrell in a proposed 1966 boxing match against the then Cassius Clay. The Muhammad Ali vs. Ernie Terrell fight did not take place until February 6, 1967. Glaser was a mentor to Clarence Avant.


References


Further reading
Bergreen, Laurence, "Louis Armstrong: An Extravagant Life". 1997 ISBN 0-553-06768-0
Holiday, Billie and Dufty, William, "Lady sings the blues". 1956 ISBN 978-0-14-006762-0
Teachout, Terry (2009). Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong. ISBN 978-0151010899.

John Cadman, 1st Baron Cadman  (7 September 1877 – 31 May 1941), was a British mining engineer, petroleum technologist and public servant.


Early life
Cadman was educated at Armstrong College, University of Durham, and received a first class Honours in Geology in 1899.


Career
Cadman served as Inspector of Mines in Trinidad and Tobago in the first decade of the 20th century. At that time Trinidad and Tobago was a British Colony. As Inspector of Mines he was responsible for the commercialization of Trinidad's oil in 1907. In this effort Cadman was joined by Arthur "Beeby" Thompson who was an engineer with oilfield experience in Russia.
Cadman later went on to teach petroleum engineering at Birmingham University in the UK. Cadman is credited with creating the course "Petroleum Engineering". He was director of the Petroleum Executive.
He was well known for his love of shellfish.
He was later Chairman of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company in the 1930s. He expanded production fourfold and eventually joined a venture by Henri Deterding of Royal Dutch/Shell to stabilize petroleum prices.


Marriage and family
Cadman married Lilian Harrigan in 1907. The couple had four children, daughters Marguerite and Sybil, and sons John and Denys.


Honours
He was created CMG in 1916, KCMG in 1918 and GCMG in 1929. On 7 June 1937 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Cadman, of Silverdale in the County of Stafford.
In 1940 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.
On 17 May 2007 Silverdale Parish Council voted to name a new street "Cadman Close" in honour of Lord Cadman.


See also
Anglo-Persian Oil Company
Abdolhossein Teymourtash


References


External links
Newspaper clippings about John Cadman, 1st Baron Cadman in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW

John Kane may refer to:


Entertainment
John Kane (actor) (1746–1799), Irish actor and comedian
John Kane (artist) (1860–1934), Scottish-born American painter
John Kane (writer) (born 1945), British actor and writer


Law
John L. Kane Jr. (born 1937), U.S. federal judge
M. John Kane IV, Oklahoma Supreme Court Justice


Military
John Kane (Medal of Honor), American soldier who fought in the American Civil War
John R. Kane (1907–1996), American aviator and Medal of Honor recipient


Politics
John I. Kane, American politician, Pennsylvania State Senator, and trade unionist
John K. Kane (1795–1858), American politician
John Kane (trade unionist) (1819–1876), British trade unionist
Jock Kane (John Kane, 1921–2013), British intelligence agency officer and GCHQ whistleblower
John Kane (politician), American politician, Oklahoma State House Representative


Sports
John Kane (outfielder) (1882–1934), American baseball outfielder for the Cubs and Reds
John Kane (infielder) (1900–1956), American baseball infielder for the Chicago White Sox
John Kane (footballer, born 1960), English football player
John Kane (footballer, born 1987), Scottish football player


Other
John M. Kane, American psychiatrist
John Innes Kane, American explorer, scientist and philanthropist


See also
Jonny Kane (born 1973), British racing driver
Jack Kane (1908–1988), Australian politician
John Cain (disambiguation)
John Caine (disambiguation)

John Nelson (1535 – 3 February 1578) was an English Jesuit martyr  who was executed during the reign of Elizabeth I. 
Nelson was from Skelton, York. He was nearing 40 when he left for Douai in 1573 for training as a priest. Two of his four brothers would later follow him there to become priests. He was ordained at Binche in the County of Hainaut by Monsignor Louis de Berlaymont, Archbishop of Cambrai, on 11 June 1576. The date and place of his admission to the Society of Jesus are unknown. The following November, he left for his mission, which appears to have been in London. 
He was arrested on 1 December 1577 at his residence, "late in the evening as he was saying the Nocturne of the Matins for the next day following", and was put into Newgate Prison as a suspected Papist. He had written to the French Jesuits during his imprisonment for permission to be admitted to the Society.
When interrogated about a week later, he refused to take the oath recognizing the Queen's supremacy in spiritual matters, and was induced by the commissioners to declare the Queen a schismatic. Under the Legislation of 1571, this was high treason and was punishable by death. He was condemned to death on 1 February 1578, and was confined after the trial in an underground dungeon in the Tower of London, the Pit of the Tower. While in prison he subsisted on bread and water and was able to say Mass.
On his execution day he refused to see several Protestant ministers, after meeting with family members.  He was taken to Tyburn and was allowed to speak before the bystanders, who were mostly hostile in the historically Protestant London. When asked to beg pardon of the Queen, he responded, "I will ask no pardon of her, for I have never offended her." He then asked any Catholics in the crowd to pray with him as he recited several common prayers in Latin. He was hanged and cut down alive, then quartered.  His last words were, reportedly, "I forgive the queen and all the authors of my death".
He was beatified on 29 December 1886 by Pope Leo XIII.


See also
Catholic Church in the United Kingdom
Douai Martyrs


References


Sources
The most reliable compact source is Godfrey Anstruther, Seminary Priests, St Edmund's College, Ware, vol. 1, 1968, pp. 245–247.

Chiang Chi-chen (Chinese: 江啟臣; pinyin: Jiāng Qǐchén; Wade–Giles: Chiang1 Chʻi3-chʻên; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Kang Khé-sîn; born 2 March 1972), also known by his English name Johnny Chiang, is a Taiwanese political scientist and politician who has served as the vice president of the Legislative Yuan since 2024.
Chiang served as an associate professor in Soochow University before his political career. He was the penultimate Director-General of the Government Information Office from 2010 to 2011, a post he resigned to become a member of the Legislative Yuan in which he has served since 2012. In March 2020, he was elected the Chairman of the Kuomintang and assumed office on 9 March until he was succeeded by Eric Chu on 5 October 2021. Chiang took office as vice president of the Legislative Yuan on 1 February 2024.


Early life and education
Chiang was born in Fengyuan, Taichung, on March 2, 1972. His father, Chiang Hai-chuan, was a farmer. He was raised by his grandparents in a mountainous area in rural Fengyuan; his grandfather was a village chief. Because he and his grandparents were speakers of Japanese, Chiang did not learn Taiwanese Mandarin until primary school. He is of Hakka Teochew descent.
After graduating first in his class from Taichung Municipal First Senior High School, where he was a track and field athlete, Chiang studied diplomacy at National Chengchi University and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) in 1994. He then was selected for the Republic of China Army and served in the 101st Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion during his compulsory military service. He was honorably discharged from the Army's special force with the rank of sergeant.
Chiang completed his graduate studies in the United States. He earned a master's degree in international relations and political science from the University of Pittsburgh in 1998, then earned his Ph.D. in international relations from the University of South Carolina in 2002. His doctoral dissertation, completed under political science professor Donald J. Puchala, was titled,  "Globalization and The Role of the State in Contemporary Political Economy: Taiwan and India in the 1980s and 1990s".


Academic career
After receiving his doctorate, Chiang was a lecturer at the University of South Carolina from January 2002 to May 2002. He then returned to Taiwan and became an associate researcher at the Taiwan Institute of Economic Research and an assistant professor at Taipei University of Marine Technology from 2002 to 2003. From February 2003 to June 2003, he was a professor of diplomacy at National Chengchi University before joining the faculty of Soochow University in July 2003 as an assistant professor of political science. He was promoted to an associate professor there in February 2007.


Political career
He was named the head of the Government Information Office in 2010. When Chiang was selected as a Kuomintang candidate for the legislature in April 2011, he resigned the GIO position and was replaced by Philip Yang. Chiang was one of five former GIO officials to appear on the ballot. He won election in 2012, and again in 2016. Chiang was chosen as one of five conveners of the Legislative Yuan's constitutional amendment committee in 2015. He shared foreign and national defense committee convener duties with Liu Shih-fang in 2016. Chiang announced his intention to contest the Taichung mayoralty in October 2017, becoming the second Kuomintang politician after Lu Shiow-yen to declare interest in the position. It was reported in February 2018 that Chiang had narrowly finished second to Lu in three different public opinion polls that served as the Kuomintang's Taichung mayoral primary. Chiang declared his candidacy for the 2020 Kuomintang chairmanship election on 25 January 2020, ten days after Wu Den-yih resigned the position. Chiang defeated Hau Lung-pin in the leadership election, held on 7 March 2020. Chiang took office as Kuomintang chairman on 9 March 2020.
In March 2021, KMT chairman Johnny Chiang rejected the "one country, two systems" as a feasible model for Taiwan, citing Beijing's response to protests in Hong Kong as well as the value that Taiwanese place in political freedoms. In September of that year, Chiang lost his bid to retain the chairmanship, finishing third behind Eric Chu and Chang Ya-chung.
Chang won his fourth consecutive legislative term in 2024, and was subsequently elected Vice President of the 11th Legislative Yuan.


Personal life
Chiang is married to Liu Tzu-ling, the daughter of former legislator Liu Shen-liang. He has two children. One of his uncles is Antonio Chiang, a former National Security Council secretary-general.


References

Joseph Lewis Jr. (1772 – March 30, 1834) was an 18th-century and 19th-century politician and lawyer from Virginia.


Biography
Born in the Colony of Virginia, Lewis served in the Virginia House of Delegates from 1799 to 1803. He was then elected a Federalist to the United States House of Representatives in 1802, serving from 1803 to 1817. There, he served as chairman of the Committee on the District of Columbia from 1807 to 1809 and again from 1811 to 1813. Lewis returned to the House of Delegates in 1817 and 1818. He died at Clifton Farm in Upperville, Virginia, on March 30, 1834.


Electoral history
1805; Lewis was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives with 55.95% of the vote, defeating Democratic-Republican William Elzey.
1807; Lewis was re-elected with 55.19% of the vote, defeating Democratic-Republican John Littlejohn.
1809; Lewis was re-elected with 62.04% of the vote, defeating Democratic-Republican William Tyler.
1811; Lewis was re-elected with 80.09% of the vote, defeating Democratic-Republican John Love.


External links
United States Congress. "Joseph Lewis Jr. (id: L000290)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.

Joshua Breaux (born October 7, 1997) is an American professional baseball catcher who is a free agent.


Amateur career
Breaux attended Tomball High School in Tomball, Texas and played college baseball at McLennan Community College. In 2017, he played collegiate summer baseball with the Falmouth Commodores of the Cape Cod Baseball League. Breaux was drafted by the Houston Astros in the 36th round of the 2017 Major League Baseball draft but did not sign and returned to McLennan.


Professional career


New York Yankees
Breaux was drafted by the New York Yankees in the second round, with the 61st overall selection, of the 2018 Major League Baseball draft.
Breaux made his professional debut with the rookie–level Gulf Coast Yankees before being promoted to the Low–A Staten Island Yankees. In 30 total games, he hit .269 with 13 RBI. Breaux played the 2019 season with the Single–A Charleston RiverDogs, slashing .271/.324/.518 with 13 home runs and 49 RBI. He did not play for a minor league team in 2020 due to the cancellation of the minor league season because of the COVID-19 pandemic, but did play five games in the Constellation Energy League.
Breaux started 2021 with the High–A Hudson Valley Renegades before being promoted to the Double–A Somerset Patriots. In 90 games between the two affiliates, he accumulated a .249/.298/.503 batting line with career–highs in home runs (23) and RBI (63). Breaux split the 2022 campaign between Somerset and the Triple–A Scranton/Wilkes-Barre RailRiders, posting a cumulative .219/.283/.422 batting line with 19 home runs and 50 RBI across 94 appearances.
Breaux split 2023 between Hudson Valley, Somerset, and Scranton. In 50 games for the three affiliates, he hit .243/.302/.466 with 12 home runs and 22 RBI. Breaux played in 11 games for Triple–A Scranton in 2024, hitting .143/.189/.314 with two home runs and five RBI. Breaux was released by the Yankees organization on June 29, 2024.


Philadelphia Phillies
On July 1, 2024, Breaux signed a minor league contract with the Philadelphia Phillies. He spent the remainder of the season with the Double-A Reading Fightin Phils and Triple-A Lehigh Valley IronPigs, playing in 29 total games for the two affiliates.
In 2025, Breaux made 51 appearances split between Reading and Lehigh Valley, batting a cumulative .222/.307/.342 with three home runs s and 15 RBI. He elected free agency following the season on November 6, 2025.


Chicago White Sox
On February 6, 2026, Breaux signed a minor league contract with the Chicago White Sox. He made 15 appearances for the Triple-A Charlotte Knights, batting .186/.250/.302 with one home run and seven RBI. Breaux was released by the White Sox organization on June 28.


References


External links
Career statistics from Baseball Reference (Minors)

Judas kiss may refer to:

The Kiss of Judas, according to the Bible, the kiss with which Judas Iscariot identified and betrayed Jesus


Film, television and theatre
Judas' Kiss (1954 film), a Spanish religious drama film
Judas Kiss (1998 film), a 1998 American crime thriller
Judas Kiss (2011 film), a 2011 American fiction drama film
The Judas Kiss (play), a 1998 play by David Hare about Oscar Wilde and Lord Alfred Douglas


Books
The Judas Kiss, a 2012 novel by David Butler


Music
"Judas Kiss" a 1988 song  by the Del-Lords from the album Based on a True Story
Judas Kiss (album), a 2013 album by Kee Marcello
"The Judas Kiss" (song), a 2008 song by Metallica from the album Death Magnetic
"The Kiss of Judas", a song by Stratovarius from the album Visions
"Judas' Kiss", a song by Petra from the album More Power to Ya

Judy Corbalis is a novelist and short story writer from New Zealand.
She graduated from the University of East Anglia in 1991. She serves on the advisory council of the UK Friends of the National Museum of Women in the Arts.


Bibliography
The Wrestling Princess and other stories (1986)
The Cuckoo Bird (1988)
Oskar and the Ice-pick (1988)
Porcellus, the Flying Pig (1988)
The Ice Cream Heroes (1989)
Your Dad's a Monkey (1989)
Flying Pig to the Rescue (1991)
Put a Sock in It, Percy (1994)
Tapu (1996)
Mortmain (2007)


References


External links
Royal Literary Fund
Fantastic Fiction UK

Julian Savulescu ( sav-oo-LES-koo; born 1963) is an Australian philosopher and bioethicist. He is Chen Su Lan Centennial Professor in Medical Ethics and Director of the Centre for Biomedical Ethics at the Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore and the Uehiro Chair in Practical Ethics at the University of Oxford. Savulescu founded the Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics in 2003, which became the Uehiro Oxford Institute in 2024 following an endowment from the Uehiro Foundation on Ethics and Education. He is a former editor-in-chief of the Journal of Medical Ethics (2001-2004 and 2011–2018).


Early life and education
Savulescu was born in Geelong, Australia. He attended Haileybury College in Melbourne on a full scholarship, and completed his medical training at Monash University, earning his Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS). He also received a Bachelor of Medical Science (BMedSc).
Savulescu completed his Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) at Monash University under Peter Singer, with a thesis examining ethical issues in end-of-life care. From 1994 to 1997, he was a Sir Robert Menzies Medical Scholar at the University of Oxford, where he studied with Derek Parfit.


Career
Before entering academia full-time, Savulescu practiced emergency medicine. He began his academic career as a Logan Research Fellow at Monash University from 1997 to 1998. From 1999 to 2002, Savulescu was a professor in the University of Melbourne Faculty of Medicine. During this period, he was also Director of the Ethics Program at the Murdoch Children's Research Institute.
In 2002, Savulescu was appointed to the Uehiro Chair in Practical Ethics at the University of Oxford, becoming the second holder of this position after Roger Crisp. In 2003, he founded the Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics and held the position of Centre Director until 2022. He remains the Uehiro Chair in Practical Ethics (part-time).
In August 2022, Savulescu was appointed Chen Su Lan Centennial Professor in Medical Ethics at the National University of Singapore, where he also heads the Centre for Biomedical Ethics.
Savulescu is Distinguished Visiting Professorial Fellow at the Murdoch Children's Research Institute and Distinguished International Visiting Professor in Law at Melbourne Law School.


Views


Procreative beneficence
Savulescu coined the term procreative beneficence. He describes it as the moral obligation (rather than mere permission) of parents who can select among potential children to choose those expected to have the best life prospects. For instance through preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) and subsequent embryo selection or selective termination. A similar position was defended by John Harris. One argument is that some traits such as memory are "all-purpose means", in the sense of being instrumental in realizing whatever life plans the child may come to have.
Philosopher Walter Veit has argued that if one accepts both procreative beneficence and consequentialism, then a parental obligation for genetic enhancement logically follows, as there is no intrinsic moral difference between selecting and enhancing embryos for welfare-maximizing traits.


Reception

The principle of procreative beneficience is controversial. Bioethicist Rebecca Bennett argued against Savulescu's position, contending that not selecting the best offspring harms no one since those potential individuals would otherwise never have existed. She further wrote that the intuitions supporting such a selection merely reflect non-moral preferences rather than genuine moral obligations. Peter Herissone-Kelly argued against this criticism.


Moral enhancement
In 2009, Professor Savulescu presented a paper at the "Festival of Dangerous Ideas", held at the Sydney Opera House in October 2009, entitled "Unfit for Life: Genetically Enhance Humanity or Face Extinction", which can be seen on Vimeo. Savulescu argues that unless humans are willing to undergo "moral enhancement", they may be on the brink of disappearing in a metaphorical "Bermuda Triangle", which he describes as a dangerous convergence of three factors: widespread access to destructive technologies, inherent limitations of human moral nature (such as parochialism and self-interest), and inadequacies of liberal democracy to address global challenges.
Norbert Paulo criticised Savulescu's argument for moral enhancement, arguing that if democratic governments had to morally enhance their populations because the majoritarian population are morally deficient, they could not be legitimate as they manipulated the population's will. Thus in Paulo's view, those advocating large-scale, state-driven and partially mandatory moral enhancement are advocating a non-democratic order.


Embryonic stem cells
Savulescu also justifies the destruction of embryos and fetuses as a source of organs and tissue for transplantation to adults. In an abstract, he argues that "The most publicly justifiable application of human cloning, if there is one at all, is to provide self-compatible cells or tissues for medical use, especially transplantation. Some have argued that this raises no new ethical issues above those raised by any form of embryo experimentation. I argue that this research is less morally problematic than other embryo research. Indeed, it is not merely morally permissible but morally required that we employ cloning to produce embryos or fetuses for the sake of providing cells, tissues or even organs for therapy, followed by abortion of the embryo or fetus." He argues that if it is permissible to destroy foetuses, for social reasons, or no reasons at all, it must be justifiable to destroy them to save lives.
He argues that stem cell research is important enough as to be justifiable even if one conceptualizes the embryo as a person.


Abortion debate
Further, as editor of the Journal of Medical Ethics, he published, in 2012, an article by two Italian academics which stated that a new-born baby is effectively no different from a foetus, is not a "person" and, morally, could be killed at the decision of the parents etc. This article was published as part of a special double issue, "Abortion, Infanticide, and Allowing Babies to Die". The double issue included articles by Peter Singer, Michael Tooley, Jeff McMahan, C. A. J. Coady, Leslie Francis, John Finnis, and others. In an editorial, Savulescu wrote: "The Journal aims in this issue to promote further and more extensive rational debate concerning this controversial and important topic by providing a range of arguments from a variety of perspectives. We have tried to be as inclusive as possible and provided a double issue to include as many as possible of the submissions we received. Infanticide is an important issue and one worthy of scholarly attention because it touches on an area of concern that few societies have had the courage to tackle honestly and openly: euthanasia. We hope that the papers in this issue will stimulate ethical reflection on practices of euthanasia that are occurring and its proper justification and limits." He also stated, "I am strongly opposed to the legalisation of infanticide along the lines discussed by Giubilini and Minerva."


Other positions
Along with neuroethicist Guy Kahane, Savulescu's article "Brain Damage and the Moral Significance of Consciousness" argues that increased evidence of consciousness in patients diagnosed with being in persistent vegetative state actually supports withdrawing or withholding care.


Books
He has co-authored two books: Medical Ethics and Law: The Core Curriculum with Tony Hope and Judith Hendrick and Unfit for the Future: The Need for Moral Enhancement (published by Oxford University Press) with Ingmar Persson.
He has also edited the books Der neue Mensch? Enhancement und Genetik (together with Nikolaus Knoepffler), Human Enhancement (together with Nick Bostrom), Enhancing Human Capacities, The Ethics of Human Enhancement. He was also a co-author of Love Is the Drug: The Chemical Future of Our Relationships addressing the future potential widespread use of aphrodisiacs. In it, he argued, that certain forms of medications can be ethically consumed as a "helpful complement" in relationships; both to fall in love and to fall out of it.


Awards and recognition
Savulescu has an Honorary degree from the University of Bucharest (2014). He was elected a Fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences in 2026.


See also


References


External links

 Media related to Julian Savulescu at Wikimedia Commons

The Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics.
The Hinxton Group: An International Consortium on Stem Cells, Ethics & Law.
Stronger, smarter, nicer humans.
Philosophy Bites podcasts with interviewer Nigel Warburton and co-host Dave Edmonds
Julian Savulescu on Designer Babies(with transcript). Philosophy Bites. Episode #178. 2 April 2012. Retrieved 27 February 2026.
Julian Savulescu on the 'Yuk' Factor (with transcript). Philosophy Bites. Episode #94. 8 March 2009. Retrieved 27 February 2026.

Julius von Zech-Burkersroda (German: Dr Julius Graf von Zech-Burkersroda; 1885–1946) was the German ambassador to The Hague at the start of World War II. He was the son in law of Theobald Bethman-Hollweg who died in 1921.
Zech-Burkersroda studied law at universities in Germany, and was commissioned as an officer in the cavalry. After twenty years' service in the diplomatic corps, he was appointed minister to The Hague in 1928 during the Weimar Republic. He remained at The Hague for the next decade, during which Adolf Hitler gained power in Germany.
In February 1940, Zech-Burkersroda claimed that the Duke of Windsor had leaked the Allied war plans for the defence of Belgium, which the Duke later denied. 
In May 1940, Zech-Burkersroda was given the responsibility of passing the German declaration of war against the Netherlands to Dutch foreign minister Eelco van Kleffens. According to Van Kleffens, Zech-Burkersroda was stunned speechless by the actions of the Nazis. On 7 June 1940, he retired from the diplomatic service, shortly after the Netherlands fell to the Nazis. Five years later, after the defeat of Nazi Germany, he was arrested by the Soviet occupation forces, and died shortly thereafter in Bautzen.


References

Jungle Jim in the Forbidden Land is a 1952 American black-and-white adventure film directed by Lew Landers, written by Samuel Newman and starring Johnny Weissmuller, Angela Greene and Jean Willes. It is the eighth entry in the Columbia Pictures Jungle Jim series.


Plot
In Wasabi, Africa, anthropologist Dr. Linda Roberts embarks on an expedition to find the rumored land of the Giant People, aided by guide Jungle Jim after her original crew abandons her. As they navigate wildlife attacks and local dangers, government officials and traders become entangled in conflicts over ivory poaching and the captured giants. Betrayal and greed among the explorers leads to violence and chaos when the giants escape. Jungle Jim helps avert an elephant stampede, exposes the true criminals and restores order to the jungle.


Cast
Johnny Weissmuller as Jungle Jim
Angela Greene as Dr. Linda Roberts
Jean Willes as Denise
Lester Matthews as Comm. Kingston
William Tannen as Doc Edwards
George Eldredge as Fred Lewis
William Fawcett as Old One
John Hart as Commissioner's Secretary


References


External links
Jungle Jim in the Forbidden Land at IMDb
Jungle Jim in the Forbidden Land at the TCM Movie Database (archived)
Jungle Jim in the Forbidden Land at the AFI Catalog of Feature Films

Kaniyakurichi is a village in the Pattukkottai taluk of Thanjavur district, Tamil Nadu, India.


Demographics
As per the 2001 census, Kaniyakurichi had a total population of 1060 with 534 males and 526 females. The sex ratio was 985. The literacy rate was 82.35.


References
"Primary Census Abstract - Census 2001". Directorate of Census Operations-Tamil Nadu. Archived from the original on 29 August 2009.

Kensington is a neighbourhood located in west Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada that began construction in 2013. Around 2028, Kensington will reach completion and have an estimated population of 8,300. Kensington will feature Saskatoon's first application of the fused grid street network.


History
From 1968 to 2005, a local greenhouse used 120 acres (49 ha) of land in the area as its primary tree nursery. Remnants of shelterbelts remained prior to development. The land that includes Kensington was annexed between 2000 and 2005. The first concept drawings of Kensington (then unnamed) appeared in the Blairmore Sector Concept Plan in 2005. Saskatoon City Council approved the neighbourhood plan on April 16, 2012.


Government and politics
Kensington exists within the federal electoral district of Saskatoon West. It is currently represented by Brad Redekopp of the Conservative Party of Canada, first elected in 2019.
Provincially, the area is within the constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. It is currently represented by Vicki Mowat of the New Democratic Party, first elected in a 2017 by-election.
In Saskatoon's non-partisan municipal politics, Kensington lies in ward 3. It is currently represented by Ann Iwanchuk, first elected in 2011.


Institutions


Education
No plans exist yet for schools in Kensington proper. Bethlehem High School and Tommy Douglas Collegiate are located in the Blairmore Urban Centre immediately to the south. The nearest elementary schools are located in adjacent Confederation Park and Pacific Heights, though the city's public and separate school boards have yet to indicate where students residing in Kensington will be bused until such a time as schools are constructed in the community.


Parks and recreation
As of 2022, construction had begun on Lions Century Park. The park is to be completed by 2023 and will include a skiing hill, spray park, ball diamond, and playground. There are four completed parks – Mahoney Park, Ed Jordan Park, Peter H Currie Park, and George H Clare Park.


Commercial
The neighbourhood concept plan identifies two commercial zones: a mixed-use commercial/residential area on the edge of the community immediately north of 22nd Street, and smaller neighbourhood commercial further to the north; the former of which was under development as of 2016, with the city's first Save-On-Foods location opening in the summer of 2017. Additional commercial is shown on current (2017) city planning maps being zoned along Neault Road to the west. Kensington is located immediately adjacent and north of the commercial district within the Blairmore Suburban Centre which includes Wal-Mart and other big-box commercial stores.


Institutional
The community plan for Kensington incorporates the former Yarrow Youth Farm, a correctional facility for at-risk youth, which was annexed into Saskatoon with the rest of the Blairmore region. In March 2012, the City of Saskatoon was in negotiations with the province to relocate the facility. The provincial government announced the closure of the facility in January 2015. By October 2015, the 40-acre site was for sale.


Location
Kensington is located within the Blairmore Suburban Development Area.  It is bounded by the west boundaries of the Confederation Park and Pacific Heights neighbourhoods to the east, Highway 14 to the south, and the remained of the Blairmore Development Area to the north and west. The proposed northern extension of Saskatchewan Highway 7 (currently Secondary Highway 684), also known as Neault Road) will form the western boundary and link to the western access point into Kensington (designated Kensington Gate). Access from the south will be via Kensington Boulevard (which will connect with 33rd Street in the north and Betts Avenue and the regional commercial hub in the south); access from the east will be provided via extensions of Diefenbaker Drive and Centennial Drive and 33rd Street West serves as a partial northern boundary for the neighbourhood; the street was realigned to make way for Kensington's development. Childers Crescent replaced Monck Avenue as the neighborhood's eastern boundary.


References


External links
Land Use Concept Plan - Kensington Neighbourhood
Kensington Neighbourhood Concept Plan
Lions Century Park
Kensington Neighborhood Map

The Kerguelen tern (Sterna virgata) is a tern of the Southern Hemisphere.
This seabird mainly breeds colonially in the Kerguelen Islands, as its common name implies. However, smaller colonies are also found in the Prince Edward Islands (i.e. Prince Edward and Marion) and Crozet Islands. The total number of individuals is from 3,500 to 6,500 birds, although there is no recent data from the main colony at Kerguelen. These birds do not inhabit Kerguelen proper, instead nesting on islets free of feral cats. During bad weather, they are known to abandon their colonies.
Kerguelen terns are among the least-ranging of all typical terns. They generally do not reach far into the seas near their breeding grounds.
These birds eat fish and marine invertebrates, especially those found in beds of the seaweed Macrocystis spp. They sometimes also hunt insects on land and catch fish from rivers on Kerguelen.
There are two subspecies:

S. v. mercuri (Voisin, 1971) – Crozet and Prince Edward Island's
S. v. virgata (Cabanis, 1875) – Kerguelen Island


References

Sterna virgata at Birdlife International accessed August 26, 2006

Khandeshwar is a railway station on the Harbour Line of the Mumbai Suburban Railway network.
In 2014, the City and Industrial Development Corporation (CIDCO) announced that it would set up an Inter State Bus Terminal on private-public participation at Khandeshwar Station. Khandeshwar railway station caters to New Panvel West but is built away from the city, while it is strategically near to Kamothe. The station derives its name from the Khandeshwar Mahadev Mandir and Khandeshwar Lake and Park. As Khandeshwar Railway station adjoins the nearer Kamothe node the people from Kamothe prefer Khandeshwar station over Manasarowar railway station which is cornered in the Juip Village.
It has 2 Platforms. PF 1 for the trains going towards Panvel and PF 2 for trains towards Thane/Goregaon/CSMT.


Gallery


References

The Kitanglad Mountain Range dominates the northern central portion of the province of Bukidnon, Philippines. It occupies portions of eight of the municipalities and cities in the province such as Talakag, Baungon, Libona, Manolo Fortich, Impasugong, Lantapan and Malaybalay. The range is one of the few remaining rainforests in the Philippines, hosting one of the most important diverse species of rare and endemic wildlife such as the Philippine eagle. Five of its peaks have very high elevations: Mount Dulang-dulang, the highest at 2,941 m (9,649 ft); Mount Kitanglad at 2,899 meters; Mount Maagnaw at 2,742 meters; Mount Lumuluyaw at 2,612 meters; and Mount Tuminungan at 2,400 meters.
The name "kitanglad" was derived from a legend that there was once a great flood that submerged the native lands of Bukidnon and only the tip of the mountain, the size of a "tanglad" (lemon grass), remained visible ("kita" in Cebuano).


Peaks
List of peaks in Kitanglad Range by elevation.

Mount Dulang-dulang 9,649 ft (2,941 m)
Mount Kitanglad 9,511 ft (2,899 m)
Mount Maagnaw 8,996 ft (2,742 m)
Mount Alanib 8,934 feet (2,723 m)
Mount Tuminungan 8,888 ft (2,709 m)
Mount Lumuluyaw 8,569 ft (2,612 m)
Mount Nanluyaw 8,540 ft (2,603 m)


History
The whole range was declared a national park by virtue of Presidential Proclamation No. 677 on December 4, 1990, known as the Mount Kitanglad Range Natural Park. In 1994, it was chosen as one of the 10 priority sites under the World Bank through the Conservation of Priority Protected Areas Project. Mount Kitanglad and its outlying area was proclaimed a protected area under the natural park category through Presidential Proclamation 896 dated October 24, 1996. On November 9, 2000, the park finally became a full-fledged protected area when Congress approved R.A. 8978 also known as the Mt. Kitanglad Range Protected Area Act of 2000.


Geographical location
Kitanglad Mountain Range is located in the northern central part of Bukidnon province, directly north of the neighboring Kalatungan Mountain Range. It lies in between 8°7′42″N and 124°55′30″E. It is bounded in the west by Talakag, northwest by Baungon, on the north by Libona and Manolo Fortich, on the northeast by Impasugong, on the east by Malaybalay City and on the south by Lantapan.


Climate
The climate at the Kitanglad Ranges falls under the Modified Corona Classification, which is characterized by a short dry season usually lasting from one to three months, and no pronounced rainy season. The area is cloud-covered all year round.
Temperature ranges from 22.7 °C in January to 24.6 °C in June. It receives the highest amount of rainfall in June. The driest period is March.


Biodiversity
The Mount Kitanglad range hosts a diverse population of plant and animal species, including many threatened and restricted-range bird species. Among the bird species found in the area are the Mindanao lorikeet, Mindanao racquet-tail, Mindanao scops owl, slaty-backed jungle-flycatcher, red-eared parrotfinch, and Apo myna.
The mountain hosts two newly discovered species of land-based mammals: a shrew-mouse and a moss-mouse.
Other important mammals include the Philippine deer, bearded pig, Mindanao gymnure, long-tailed Macaque, Mindanao tree shrew, Philippine flying lemur, Philippine pygmy squirrel, Mindanao flying squirrel. There are also rare bats such as the endemic Mindanao pygmy fruit bat.


Hydrological features
The Kitanglad Mountain Range forms the headwater catchment area of several major river systems draining north and central Mindanao. Among these rivers are the Cagayan River, Tagoloan River, and Pulangi River, a major tributary of the Rio Grande de Mindanao. Drainage in the area is in a characteristic radial pattern, emanating from the highest points in the range.


See also
List of protected areas of the Philippines


References


External links

Birdwatching in Kitanglad Natural Park
Mt. Kitanglad Range Natural Park

The Korycanar Formation is a Late Cretaceous geologic formation in the Czech Republic. Archosauromorph remains diagnostic to the genus level are among the fossils that have been recovered from the formation and also dinosaur remains are among the fossils that have been recovered from the formation, although none have yet been referred to a specific genus.


Paleofauna
Ponerosteus exogirarum - "Tibia"


See also

List of dinosaur-bearing rock formations
List of stratigraphic units with few dinosaur genera


Footnotes


References
Weishampel, David B.; Dodson, Peter; and Osmólska, Halszka (eds.): The Dinosauria, 2nd, Berkeley: University of California Press. 861 pp. ISBN 0-520-24209-2.

Kosmos 839 (Russian: Космос 839 meaning Cosmos 839) was a satellite which was used as a target for tests of anti-satellite weapons. It was launched by the Soviet Union in 1976 as part of the Dnepropetrovsk Sputnik programme, and used as a target for Kosmos 843 as part of the Istrebitel Sputnikov programme.
It was launched aboard a Kosmos-3M carrier rocket, from Site 132/1 at the Plesetsk Cosmodrome. The launch occurred at 21:08 UTC on 8 July 1976.
Kosmos 839 was placed into a low Earth orbit with a perigee of 915 kilometres (569 mi), an apogee of 2,053 kilometres (1,276 mi), 65.9 degrees of inclination, and an orbital period of 115.6 minutes. It was successfully intercepted by Kosmos 843 on 21 July. As of 2009, debris is still in orbit.
Kosmos 839 was the third of ten Lira satellites to be launched, of which all but the first were successful. Lira was derived from the earlier DS-P1-M satellite, which it replaced.


See also

1976 in spaceflight


References

Krosno Odrzańskie [ˈkrɔsnɔ ɔˈdʐaɲskʲɛ] (German: Crossen an der Oder) is a town in Lubusz Voivodeship in western Poland, on the east bank of Oder River, at the confluence with the Bóbr. With 11,319 inhabitants (2019) it is the capital of Krosno County.


History

The town was first mentioned as Crosno in 1005, when Duke Bolesław I Chrobry of Poland had a fortress built here in the course of his armed conflict with Emperor Henry II and the West Slavic Veleti confederation. Due to its strategic location as a point of passage across the Oder, it played an important role at the western border of the Polish kingdom with the Holy Roman Empire during the 11th to 13th centuries. As a result of the fragmentation of Poland, in 1163 Krosno was part of the Duchy of Silesia ruled by Bolesław I the Tall of the Silesian Piasts. In 1201 it received its town charter by Bolesław's son Duke Henry I the Bearded. Henry erected a stone castle at Krosno, where he died in 1238 and where his widow, Hedwig of Andechs, took refuge during the 1241 first Mongol invasion of Poland. When the Duchy of Wrocław was finally divided in 1251, the town became part of the newly created Duchy of Głogów under Konrad I.
The town changed hands several times; once it was given as payment to soldiers of the Ascanian margraves of Brandenburg. When the last Piast duke Henry XI of Głogów died without issue in 1476, his widow Barbara of Brandenburg, daughter of Elector Albert Achilles of Brandenburg, inherited the territory of Krosno. The Brandenburg influence met with fierce opposition by Henry's cousin Duke Jan II the Mad of Żagań, who devastated Krosno but in 1482 had to sign an agreement with Albert Achilles, who was able to retain the Krosno (Crossen) area. As a former part of the Duchy of Głogów it officially remained a lien of the Bohemian kingdom until in 1538 King Ferdinand I, renounced all rights to Krosno, thereby finalizing the district's belonging to the Neumark region of the Brandenburg margraviate.

With Brandenburg, Crossen became part of the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701. In reforms after the Napoleonic Wars, the town became part of the Province of Brandenburg in 1815 and was the seat of Landkreis Crossen as part of Regierungsbezirk Frankfurt. As a result of the Unification of Germany, it became part of the German Empire in 1871. In May 1886 the town was devastated by a whirlwind.
In 1945 during World War II, the town was conquered by the Soviet Red Army. After Germany's defeat in the war, the town once again became part of Poland. Already in March 1945 the town was claimed by the Polish state, with the assignment of the town being switched back and forth between Western Pomerania and Lower Silesia several times. On May 2, a group of Polish communists from Poznań arrived to assume administration of the town. The situation complicated when another group with 66 members arrived, who likewise intended to rule the town. By June 1945, conflicts between these groups had been resolved. The adjective Odrzańskie after the Oder river, upon which the town is situated, was added for distinction from other settlements of the same name in Poland, most notably the town of Krosno.
From 1975 to 1998, it was administratively located in the Zielona Góra Voivodeship.


Demographics


Notable people
Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff (1699–1753) German painter and architect
Alexander von Knobelsdorff (1723–1799), Prussian field marshal
Christiane Becker-Neumann (1778–1797), German actress
Eduard Seler (1849–1922), German anthropologist, archaeologist, philogian, and Mesoamerica scholar
Rudolf Pannwitz (1881–1969), German author
Alfred Henschke ps. Klabund (1890–1928), German author
Siegfried Müller aka Kongo-Müller (1920–1983), German mercenary
Aneta Konieczna (born 1978), canoe racer, Olympic medallist
Tomasz Kuszczak (born 1982), footballer


Twin towns – sister cities
See twin towns of Gmina Krosno Odrzańskie.


References


External links
Official town website
Jewish Community in Krosno Odrzańskie on Virtual Shtetl

Krystopher Nathaniel Barnes (born April 2, 1998) is an American professional football linebacker. Barnes played college football for the UCLA Bruins and signed with the Green Bay Packers as an undrafted free agent in 2020. He has also played for the Arizona Cardinals, Carolina Panthers, and Washington Commanders.


Early life
Barnes was born and grew up in Bakersfield, California. He attended and played football at Liberty High School, along with childhood friend and future Green Bay Packers teammate Jordan Love. Together, Barnes and Love helped lead Liberty to the first Division I Central Section championship in school history.


College career
In four seasons at UCLA, Barnes played in 43 games with 31 starts, recording 212 tackles (139 solo, 21 for loss), five sacks, and two interceptions. Barnes was All-Pac 12 Conference honorable mention his senior season.


Professional career


Green Bay Packers
On April 29, 2020, the Green Bay Packers signed Barnes to a three-year, $2.29 million contract as an undrafted free agent that includes a signing bonus of $7,000.
Throughout training camp, Barnes competed to be a starting inside linebacker against Oren Burks, Ty Summers, and fellow rookie Kamal Martin. On September 5, 2020, the Packers waived Barnes as part of their final roster cuts, but signed him to the practice squad the next day after clearing waivers. On September 12, 2020, the Green Bay Packers promoted Barnes to their active roster. Head coach Matt LaFleur elected to start Barnes at inside linebacker, alongside Christian Kirksey, to start the regular season.
He made his first career start and his professional debut in the Green Bay Packers’ season-opener at the Minnesota Vikings and recorded seven combined tackles (five solo) during their 43–34 victory. On October 18, 2020, Barnes recorded ten combined tackles (seven solo) during a 38–10 loss at the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Week 6. In Week 7 against the Houston Texans, Barnes recorded his first career sack on Deshaun Watson during the 35–20 win. He was placed on the reserve/COVID-19 list by the team on November 6, 2020, and activated on December 2.
In Week 15 against the Carolina Panthers, Barnes forced a fumble on quarterback Teddy Bridgewater at the one yard line that was recovered by the Packers during the 24–16 win.
During the team's matchup against the Kansas City Chiefs in Week 9, Barnes made a season-high 9 tackles, including one that prevented a touchdown by running back Darrel Williams. He signed his tender offer from the Packers on April 18, 2022, to keep him with the team.
In the 2022 season-opener at the Vikings, he sustained ankle injury, which put him on injured reserve. On November 5, 2022, he was activated off of injured reserve.


Arizona Cardinals
On March 25, 2023, Barnes signed with the Arizona Cardinals. He played in 16 games with six starts, recording 55 tackles, six passes defensed, and an interception.
Barnes appeared in all 17 games for Arizona during the 2024 season, accumulating two sacks and 35 combined tackles.


Carolina Panthers
On August 3, 2025, Barnes signed with the Carolina Panthers. He was released on August 26, and re-signed to the practice squad. On November 26, the Panthers signed Barnes to their active roster.


Washington Commanders
On August 18, 2026, Barnes signed with the Washington Commanders. On August 30, he was waived as part of final roster cuts before the start of the 2026 season.


NFL career statistics


Regular season


Postseason


References


External links
UCLA Bruins profile

Lakeside Amusement Park is a family-owned amusement park in Lakeside, Colorado. Opened in 1908, it is the oldest amusement park in Colorado still operating in its original location, and is the last remaining White City-style park in the United States. The park notably features the Tower of Jewels and the Cyclone roller coaster.


History

Lakeside Amusement Park, originally known as White City, was founded by a group led by Denver-based brewer Adolph Zang, on an approximately 57-acre site adjacent to Lake Rhoda (then known as West Berkeley Lake). Referred to as "the Coney Island of the West", the park featured the Beaux-Arts and Neoclassical architectural styles favored in many other amusement parks of the era, and was lit by an estimated 100,000 electric bulbs. It was serviced by a trolley line built by the Denver Tramway, but was independently owned, rather than being owned by the trolley company that served the park, meaning it is not a true trolley park.
The park’s original buildings included the 150-foot Tower of Jewels at the park’s main entrance, a natatorium, a 15,000 square foot ballroom, a roller skating rink, a boat house with a 160-foot pier, and a miniature train station modeled after Denver Union Station.
Original rides and attractions included the Lakeshore Railroad (a miniature railroad which circled the lake), a merry-go-round, a Ferris wheel, an airship and balloon ascension platform, a funhouse, the Devil's Palace (described as an "interesting and instructing amusement" featuring snakes and other reptiles), a shoot the chutes, a mile-long Scenic Railway, and the Velvet Coaster. W.H. Labb of Indianapolis designed the Velvet Coaster, which featured a 1,200 foot (370 m) framework situated along the southern end of the lake, with a total of 3,600 feet (1,100 m) of track. A ride called Tickler was installed, but was removed soon after customers reported it causing serious injuries, including broken bones.
Derby Racer, a double-track racing coaster designed by John A. Miller, was added in 1911. The ride was built at the northern end of the park, which had previously been used for social functions only, signifying a gradual move away from the park's White City aspirations into a more amusement ride-centric focus.
Scenic Railway and several other structures in the southwestern section of the park were destroyed by a fire on November 15, 1911.  Another fire in January 1912 destroyed the skating rink and damaged Derby Racer. Derby Racer was repaired, while the natatorium was converted into a new roller skating rink. It would not be used for swimming again until 1928.
Following its acquisition by Ben Krasner in 1935, the park underwent a period of major renovations and additions. Many new rides were added, including the Cyclone roller coaster, which replaced Derby Racer in 1940. New buildings and features were built in the Art Deco style, including individual ticket booths for most major rides and attractions. Architect Richard L. Crowther designed much of the park's architectural features during this period, and included a great deal of neon lighting in his work.
In June 1973, an investigation by a Jefferson County Grand Jury found that "all structures on the...grounds would justify charges as dangerous buildings as described in the Uniform Building Code". Three inspections were conducted through 1972 and 1973, with one on May 21, 1973 finding 70 specific violations of building, electrical, and fire codes. Some of the violations included antiquated wiring, non-fire resistant paneling, lack of exit lighting, missing portable fire extinguishers, and inward-opening exit doors. The report also noted that "general sanitary conditions in food preparation and customer service areas...w[as] unbelievable. Grease accumulation and scum were heavy on cooking appliances, all adjacent areas and particularly on the floor and counters". Following the investigation, the park made changes based on the grand jury report findings to improve safety to avoid being forced to close its doors.
The ballroom closed in 1972 due to declining interest in ballroom dancing. It was later deemed a significant fire hazard and was demolished in 1974. A fire in December 1973 destroyed the pool building, which was at the time being used for maintenance and off-season storage. Parts and blueprints for many of the park's rides were lost.
From 1938 through 1988, Lakeside Amusement Park operated Lakeside Speedway on the park grounds. The auto racetrack was a 1⁄5-mile (0.32 km) oval and featured races of three car classes sponsored by CARC: stock, limited modified, and fully modified. The race track was built on the site of the park's former baseball diamond, and reused the spectator stands from the baseball field in the track's viewing area. Following a fatal accident in 1988, racing at the park came to an end.
In 2014, members of the Domino Service Dogs training group were denied access to the train ride unless they left their service dogs behind. As a result, the Cross Disability Coalition filed a lawsuit against the park, alleging violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Colorado's laws ensuring access. The local police department and the town of Lakeside were also included as defendants in the suit.
The 1908 tower and casino building still stand, but are closed to the public, instead being used for storage and park offices. Also closed to the public is the Riviera cocktail lounge, the lone remnant of the park's original ballroom building.


Rides


Roller coasters


Other amusement rides


Kiddie rides


Former attractions


Incidents at Lakeside Amusement Park
In February 1908, a car on Scenic Railway left the track, causing injuries to fifteen people.
In June 1908, a car on Scenic Railway left the track, causing injuries to seventeen people.
In July 1908, a woman shot an ex-boyfriend in the cafe below the ballroom.
In July 1912, a woman drowned in the lake.
In August 1915, a man was killed after being thrown from Derby Racer.
In July 1916, a couple drowned in the lake under unknown circumstances.
In August 1919, a boy was killed after being struck by Train.
In July 1923, a man was injured after falling from Derby Racer.
In June 1934, two youths drowned in the lake after their boat overturned.
In June 1944, an 18-year-old woman was killed and seven others were injured in an accident on Cyclone.
In August 1950, a 7-year-old girl was shot through the leg by a bullet that pierced the protective shield of the shooting gallery.
In 1954, a man was thrown from a car on the Cyclone and died from injuries.
In September 1959, four people were injured when the emergency brake system failed on Wild Chipmunk.
In June 1962, a man was killed when he struck an object while standing during a ride on Cyclone.
In May 1972, four people were injured by a train collision on Cyclone.
In September 1988, a woman was killed and twelve others were injured when a race car flipped into the viewing stands at the Lakeside Speedway Track.
In September 1994, 24 people were injured when two trains on Cyclone collided in the loading area.


In popular culture

The park is featured in season one, episode ten of the animated series Thundarr the Barbarian.
Lakeside Amusement Park is one of several parks featured in the 1999 public television program Great Old Amusement Parks.
Scenes from the 1995 movie Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead were shot in the park.
The park served as the basis for the fictional location "Lakefront Expo" in Fortnight, a novel about serial murders in Denver, set in 2034.


References


Notes


External links
Lakeside Amusement Park
After 110 Years of Ups and Downs, a New Coaster Could Take Lakeside to New Heights Westword. Denver, CO
Lakeside Amusement Park at the Roller Coaster DataBase
Lakeside Amusement Park historic photos from the Denver Public Library
Lakeside Amusement Park photos and video at Theme Park Review

Lambert's Point Knitting Mill, also known as The Knitting Mill and Old Dominion Paper Company, is a historic mill building located at Norfolk, Virginia. It was built in 1895, and consists of the central two-story original mill building highlighted by a tall four-story tower.  It was augmented in the 1950s by a one-story addition on the south elevation, and by additional one-story additions on the north and west sides of the building. The masonry structure is clad with smooth-finished concrete stucco.
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2006.


References

Las Meninas is a 1656 painting by Diego Velázquez. Las Meninas may also refer to:

Las Meninas (Picasso), a series of 58 paintings by Pablo Picasso, painted in 1957
Las Meninas (horse), an Irish Thoroughbred racehorse
Las Meninas (film), a 2008 Ukrainian film

Latak (Persian: لاتک, also Romanized as Lātak) is a village in Shabkhus Lat Rural District, Rankuh District, Amlash County, Gilan Province, Iran.
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the village's population was 96 in 27 households. The following census in 2011 counted 87 people in 25 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the village as 77 people in 28 households.


References

Lawrence McDonald may refer to:

Larry McDonald (1935–1983), American politician and member of the United States House of Representatives
Larry McDonald (percussionist) (born 1939), Caribbean percussionist
Lawrence G. McDonald, former vice-president at Lehman Brothers
Lawrence McDonald (South African politician), member of the National Assembly of South Africa

Leeds is a surname of English origin. It is likely derived from the city of Leeds in West Yorkshire or the village of Leeds in Kent.
Notable people with the surname include:

Alan Leeds (born 1947), American music executive
Alfred Nicholson Leeds (1847–1917), English amateur paleontologist
Andrea Leeds (1914–1984), American film actor
Andrew Leeds (rugby) (born 1964), Australian rugby footballer
Andrew Leeds (actor)
Anthony Leeds (1925–1989), American anthropologist
Billy Leeds (1880–1955), Australian rules footballer
Charles J. Leeds, American politician, Mayor of New Orleans 1874–76
Doug Leeds (born 1968), American businessman
Douglas B. Leeds (1947–2011), American businessman
Edward Leeds (priest) (died 1590), English clergyman
Edward Thurlow Leeds (1877–1955), English archaeologist, Keeper of the Ashmolean Museum 1928–45
Eric Leeds (born 1952), American musician
Herbert I. Leeds (1900–1954), American film director
Herbert Leeds (1855–1930), American amateur golfer and golf course architect
Joanie Leeds (born 1978), American musician
Lila Leeds (1928–1999), American film actor
Morris E. Leeds (1869–1952), American electrical engineer
Peter Leeds (1917–1996), American actor
Phil Leeds (1916–1998), American film actor
Sara Leeds (born 1994/1995), American TikToker
Stacy Leeds (born 1971), American law professor
Thelma Leeds (1910–2006), American actor
Titan Leeds (1699–1738), American almanac publisher


Fictional characters
Ned Leeds, comic book character
James Leeds, central character in the film Children of a Lesser God


See also
All pages with titles containing Leeds which may include people not yet added to the list above
Leeds (disambiguation)


References

Libia Dennise García Muñoz Ledo (born 15 June 1983) is a Mexican lawyer, writer and politician. Currently serving as the governor of Guanajuato after winning the 2024 election, she is the first woman to govern the state. She is a member of the National Action Party (PAN).
On 10 April 2023, she was appointed secretary of social and human development for the state of Guanajuato. 
She was secretary of government of the state of Guanajuato during the years 2021 to 2023. She has also served two terms as a local deputy in the Congress of Guanajuato, from 2015 to 2018 and from 2018 to 2021.


Biography
Libia Dennise García Muñoz Ledo was born in León, Guanajuato, in 1983. 
She has a law degree from Universidad De La Salle Bajío and a master's degree in constitutional and administrative law. In private practice, she has worked as a litigation attorney in civil and commercial matters.
She was part of the National Training Program for Democratic Leaders and Political Management, by the Organization of American States (OAS) in conjunction with the University of Guanajuato; the Seminar "Effective Legislation and Strategic Political Communication", by The Washington Center; and the Seminar in Public Management, by the Universidad Camilo José Cela de Madrid, Spain.
Her work experience includes being an advisor to the Parliamentary Group of the National Action Party in the 62nd session of the Congress of Guanajuato from 2012 to 2015, as well as legal advisor in the Directorate of Governmental Liaison of the Undersecretary of Liaison and Political Coordination of the State Government.


Political career
She began her activism in the National Action Party (PAN) in 2004. During her youth, she was part of Acción Juvenil.
Within the State Directive Committee and the Municipal Directive Committee of León, Guanajuato, she has held the positions of state advisor, secretary of Internal Strengthening of the State Directive Committee of the National Action Party in León, PAN representative before the electoral bodies and trainer endorsed by the National System of Trainers of the National Action Party (SCAN).
She was a local deputy in the Congress of Guanajuato for the 5th local district on two consecutive occasions, during the 63rd and 64th sessions, making her the first woman re-elected in Guanajuato. As a local deputy, she promoted the proposal for the creation of the State Program for the Protection of Breastfeeding and the approval of the Olimpia Law.
In 2021, she was appointed by Governor Diego Sinhué Rodríguez Vallejo as the secretary of government, making her the first woman in the history of the state of Guanajuato to hold that position.
After 10 April 2023, she served as secretary of social and human development of the state of Guanajuato.
On 16 August 2023, the national leadership of the PAN installed a political roundtable to define the (female) candidate for governor of Guanajuato for the 2024 elections. Libia Dennise was officially recognized by the PAN as one of the two candidates for the Governorship of the State. She fought and won the gubernatorial election held on 2 June 2024.
She was sworn in on 26 September 2024 for a six-year term.


References

Linguiça (Portuguese: [lĩˈɡwisɐ]) is a Portuguese sausage made from pork and seasoned with onion, garlic, paprika and other spices. It can be used fresh in cooked preparations or undergo a curing and preservation process through smoking.


Uses in Portuguese cuisine
Linguiça, like many other sausages, is generally served as part of a meal, typically accompanied by rice, beans, and other pork products. Feijoada, for example, is a traditional Portuguese dish (considered Brazil's national dish), also common in Angola, that incorporates linguiça with beans, ham hocks, and other foods.
In the Bixiga neighborhood of São Paulo, one variant is especially popular: the linguiça calabresa or simply calabresa, prepared originally with Calabrese chili pepper by Italian immigrants, and particularly used in pizzas as a spicy sausage. Its popularity compares with pepperoni in the United States. It is common to differentiate the linguiça calabresa from its counterpart linguiça portuguesa, prepared from the original Portuguese recipe, and also served in pizzas as mild sausage, generally with egg slices.
Linguiça is also used in francesinha, a traditional Portuguese dish, from Porto. The linguiça is incorporated in its sauce, giving it a distinct flavour.


Popularity and uses outside Portugal and Brazil
Outside of Portugal, linguiça is also popular in Goa, Macau, and other former Portuguese colonial possessions. In these regions, it is typically sliced before being grilled or braised, often with a light-bodied beer. It is also popular in California, Rhode Island, and southern Massachusetts.In Mangalore Chorizo is known as Linguica and cooked with onions, Bafat Masala and Potatoes, usually over  a wood fire, and eaten with sannas, a type of steamed rice cake or bread.
In Hawaii, linguiça is known as "Portuguese sausage", and is commonly eaten for breakfast. The sausage is usually smoked using banana leaves. Even the Hawaiian McDonald's breakfast menu features Portuguese sausage, along with other Hawaiian foods such as rice and formerly saimin.


See also

List of smoked foods


References

Lisa K. Wyatt is an American actress and comedian. According to the biography on her official site, she has appeared in more than 150 film, television and regional theatre credits. In the fifth season of The Office, she appeared as Lynne, the love interest of Kevin Malone.


Education
Wyatt graduated magna cum laude from St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota, with a BA degree in theatre and math.


Career
Wyatt has appeared in the films Legally Blonde (2001), Donnie Darko (2001), American Dreamz (2006) and Mr. Woodcock (2007). She had a supporting role in Southland Tales (2006), which premiered at the Cannes Film Festival in 2006. The film was directed by Richard Kelly, who previously directed Wyatt in Donnie Darko. The role of Terri Riley, a soccer mom who becomes a revolutionary, was written specifically for Wyatt.
Wyatt had recurring principal roles in the television shows Days of Our Lives and Passions, and has also made appearances in Ugly Betty, My Name Is Earl, The Suite Life on Deck, Six Feet Under, Frasier, Rules of Engagement and Gilmore Girls. Wyatt has also appeared in commercials, done voice-over work and performed stand-up comedy in several comedy clubs in the Los Angeles area. Along with her husband, Jim Blanchette, she coaches other actors in an acting technique called "The Mechanics of Believability" at the Acting Garage in the Van Nuys district of Los Angeles. Wyatt also designs jewelry for her own company, "Lisa K. Wyatt: Jewelry for all Seasons".
Wyatt previously appeared in a recurring role in NBC's The Office as Lynn, the love interest of Kevin Malone. She first appeared in the episode "Blood Drive", where she meets Kevin at a singles party. Wyatt appeared in the supporting role "Rhonda Martin" in The Box, a horror movie released on November 6, 2009, starring Cameron Diaz, James Marsden and Frank Langella.


Filmography


Film


Television


References


External links
Official website
Lisa K. Wyatt at IMDb

American Idol is an American singing competition television series created by Simon Fuller; it is produced by Fremantle and 19 Entertainment. It began airing on Fox in the United States on June 11, 2002, and ended on April 7, 2016. The series moved to ABC with its sixteenth season which debuted on March 11, 2018. It started off as an addition to the Idols format based on the British series Pop Idol, and became one of the most successful shows in the history of American television. The concept of the series involves discovering recording stars from unsigned singing talents, with the winner determined by the viewers in America through telephones, Internet, and SMS text voting.
As of January 26, 2026, 734 episodes of American Idol have aired.


Series overview


Episodes


Season 1 (2002)


Season 2 (2003)


Season 3 (2004)


Season 4 (2005)


Season 5 (2006)


Season 6 (2007)


Season 7 (2008)


Season 8 (2009)


Season 9 (2010)


Season 10 (2011)


Season 11 (2012)


Season 12 (2013)


Season 13 (2014)


Season 14 (2015)


Season 15 (2016)


Season 16 (2018)


Season 17 (2019)


Season 18 (2020)


Season 19 (2021)


Season 20 (2022)


Season 21 (2023)


Season 22 (2024)


Season 23 (2025)


Season 24


Most watched episodes
American Idol has seen its fair share of viewership changes over the years. The show had 38.1 million viewers in the finale of season 2 and an all-time low with a mere 5.55 million viewers tuning in to watch the final performances of the fourteenth season.


References


External links
Official website
American Idol at IMDb

This is a list of all stations of the Delhi Metro, a rapid transit system serving Delhi and its satellite cities in the National Capital Region of India. The network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 271 stations with a total length of 374.47 kilometres (232.68 mi). Delhi Metro is built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC) and the first section was opened on 25 December 2002 on the Red Line.
Sikanderpur station offers an interchange with Gurgaon Metro via a 90 m × 9 m walkway. 
Noida Sector 52 station offers an interchange with Noida Metro.
Each line of the Delhi Metro is identified by a specific colour. The system uses rolling stocks of both broad gauge and standard gauge trains, and has a combination of elevated, underground and at-grade lines. The Metro is open from about 05:00 to 00:00, with trains operating at a peak frequency of 2–3 minutes, and has an average daily count of 2,760,000 commuters.


Statistics

* Transfer stations are counted more than once. There are 27 transfer stations: 26 transfer stations serving 2 lines and 1 transfer station serving 3 lines. If transfer stations are counted only once, the result will be 243 stations.

Metro stations under construction: 69
Metro stations planned/ proposed: 77


Metro stations


See also


Notes


References


External links

Official website of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (DMRC)
Delhi Metro station information

This is a list of ambassadors appointed by the Chinese government to represent it to the Soviet and Russian governments. Since China sent its first representative to Russia in 1878 under the Qing Dynasty, the government of both countries have changed multiple times through revolution, collapse of the previous state and civil war. This list does not include representatives of the Republic of China, commonly known as Taiwan, to Russia after its official relations with the Soviet Union ended on October 2, 1949.
The current iteration of the post is Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the People's Republic of China to the Russian Federation. Zhang Hanhui has held the post of Chinese ambassador to Russia since he presented his letter of credence to Russian President Vladimir Putin on February 5, 2020.


Envoys of the Qing Empire to the Russian Empire (1878–1912)
The Qing Empire began to send an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to Russia in 1878. Chonghou, the first envoy, left Russia for China without permission and was replaced by Shao Yu-lien, who was consul at the Chinese embassy in Russia. On February 17, 1902, Yang Yu became the only Qing envoy to Russia to have died in office. China appointed Luo Fenglu to become its envoy on August 29, 1901, but the appointment was rejected by Russia.


Envoys of the Republic of China to the Russian Empire (1912–1918)
The Republic of China was established in 1912. The Russian Empire recognized the Republic of China on October 6, 1913, and the Lou Tseng-tsiang continued his role as the envoy to Russia for the new republic. After the October Revolution, China's mission to Russia was withdrawn in February 1918, and diplomatic relations were halted.


Representative of the Republic of China to the Soviet Union (1923–1949)
Under the Beiyang government, China established a representative office in the Soviet Union in October 1923. On May 31, 1924, diplomatic relations were restored.


Ambassadors of the People's Republic of China to the Soviet Union (1949–1991)


Ambassadors to Russia (since 1991)
The Chinese foreign ministry declared recognized the Russian Federation on December 27, 1991, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union two days before. Wang Jinqing, who had been Ambassador to the Soviet Union, was appointed the first Chinese ambassador to post-Soviet Russia.


See also
China–Russia relations
Sino–Soviet relations
List of ambassadors of Russia to China


Notes


References

This is a list of company towns in the United States.

Towns listed in bold are still considered company towns today; other entries are former company towns. See the Category:Company towns in the United States for an unannotated list of articles.


Listed by state


Alabama
Acipco, Alabama, formerly owned by American Cast Iron Pipe Company
Aldrich, Alabama, formerly owned by Montevallo Coal Mining Company
Bayview, Alabama, formerly owned by Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Co.
Bemiston, Alabama, formerly owned by the Bemis Brothers Bag Company
Chickasaw, Alabama, formerly owned by Gulf Shipbuilding Corporation
Docena, Alabama, formerly owned by Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Co.
Edgewater, Alabama, formerly owned by Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Co.
Fairfield, Alabama, (1910) originally "Corey", formerly owned by Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Co.
Kaulton, Alabama, owned by Kaul Lumber Co.
Margaret, Alabama established by Alabama Fuel and Iron Company
West Blocton, Alabama, formerly owned by Cahaba Coal Mining Company
Woodward, Alabama, formerly owned by Woodward Iron Company, later acquired by US Steel


Arizona
Ajo, Arizona, owned by Phelps Dodge
Bagdad, Arizona, owned by Freeport McMoRan (formerly Phelps Dodge)
Clarkdale, Arizona, built, named for, and formerly owned by Senator William A. Clark's United Verde Copper Company
Goodyear, Arizona, founded by and named after the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
Kearny, Arizona, built by Kennecott Mining Company in 1958
Litchfield Park, Arizona, built by and named after Goodyear CEO Paul W. Litchfield
Morenci, Arizona, owned by Freeport McMoRan (formerly Phelps Dodge)
San Manuel, Arizona, built for Magma Copper (later BHP)


Arkansas
Bauxite, Arkansas, operated as a company town based on the aluminum industry until Alcoa ceased services in 1969.
Blakely, Arkansas, founded by Dierks Lumber and Coal Company
Bonanza, Arkansas, structured into a company town by Central Coal & Coke Company
Burdette, Arkansas, established by the Three States Lumber Company in the early 1900s
Crossett, Arkansas, constructed by Crossett Lumber Company
Forester, Arkansas, founded in 1930 as a sawmill company town owned by Caddo River Lumber Company
Graysonia, Arkansas, built by the Arkadelphia Lumber Company then incorporated with elected town officials to form a "company owned town".
Huttig, Arkansas, built by the Frost-Johnson Timber Company
Mountain Pine, Arkansas, founded by Dierks Lumber and Coal Company
Okay, Arkansas, founded by Ideal Cement Company, which produced the OK brand.
Trumann, Arkansas, developed by Poinsett Lumber Company, later to become the Singer Company, from decades of short-term lumber villages and camps.
Wilson, Arkansas, started by The Wilson Company, initially a lumber company before transitioning to farming the cleared land.


California
Betteravia, California, built by Union Sugar Company
Boron, California, originally built by Pacific Coast Borax Company (now Rio Tinto Borax Mine)
Chester, California, associated with The Collins Companies
Cowell, California, built by Cowell Portland Cement
Crannell, California, built by Little River Redwood Company
Eagle Mountain, California, built by Kaiser Steel
Fort Bragg, California, is a decommissioned United States Army post with residential development and California Western Railroad service overseen by the Union Lumber Company, later Georgia-Pacific
Graeagle, California, owned by Fruit Growers Supply Company, an affiliate of Sunkist
Guasti, California, established by the Italian Vineyard Company
Hercules, California, built by the Hercules Powder Company
Hilt, California, owned by Northern California Lumber Co., then purchased by the Fruit Growers Supply Company, an affiliate of Sunkist
Irvine, California, built by The Irvine Company and incorporated in 1971; the largest planned community in the world, but technically not a company town.
Kirkwood, California, Owned by Vail Resorts
Korbel, Humboldt County, California, built by Humboldt Lumber Mill Company
McCloud, California, built by McCloud River Railroad Lumber Company.
Metropolitan, California, built by Metropolitan Redwood Lumber Company
Nipton, California, owned by Spiegelworld
Nortonville, California, owned by the Black Diamond Coal Mining Company
Pino Grande, California, built by El Dorado Lumber Company
Rockport, California, built by Cottoneva Lumber Company
Ryan, California, built by the Pacific Coast Borax Company
Samoa, California, built by Vance Lumber Company
Scotia, California, largely owned by the Pacific Lumber Company (PALCO)
Selby, California, owned by American Smelting and Refining Company.
Spreckels, California, formerly owned by Spreckels Sugar Company
Tormey, California, owned by American Smelting and Refining Company.
Trona, California, formerly owned by American Potash and Chemical
Usal, California, built by Usal Redwood Company
Weed, California, named for sawmill owner Abner Weed
Westwood, California, built by the Red River Lumber Company, sold in 1944 to Fruit Growers Supply Company, an affiliate of Sunkist
Wheeler, California, built by lumber company


Colorado
Climax, Colorado, built by the Climax Molybdenum Company, The residential houses were all transported to the West Park subdivision of Leadville, Colorado, before 1965, leaving only the mining buildings standing.
Durango, Colorado, organized in 1880 by the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad
Gilman, Colorado, built around (and eventually abandoned due to) the New Jersey Zinc Company's Eagle mine
Ludlow, Colorado, was dominated by Colorado Fuel and Iron
Portland, Fremont County, Colorado, built by the Ideal Cement Company


Connecticut
Hazardville, Connecticut, industrial village centered around the Hazard Powder Company powder mill
Collinsville, Connecticut, industrial village centered around the Collins Axe Company Manufacture of Machetes and Hand Axes


Florida
Lake Buena Vista, Bay Lake, and the Reedy Creek Improvement District located within Walt Disney World Resort, which is owned by The Walt Disney Company
Ybor City, built by Vicente Martinez Ybor for his cigar manufacturing businesses; now one of Tampa's top night spots


Hawaii
Paia, Hawaii, developed by the Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Co.
Puʻunene, Hawaii, developed by the Hawaiian Commercial & Sugar Co.
Pahala, Hawaii, developed by C. Brewer & Company, later Ka'u Sugar Company, after consolidation with Hutchinson Sugar Plantation Company in Na'alehu.
Na'alehu, Hawaii, developed by Hutchinson Sugar Plantation In an effort spearheaded by Manager J. Beaty to "cityfy" the smaller plantation camps into one consolidated town.


Idaho
Cobalt, Idaho, owned by the Howe Sound Mining Company (see Holden Village, Washington)
Conda, Idaho (Anaconda Copper Mining Co.)
Elk River, Idaho
Headquarters, Idaho (Potlatch Lumber Company)
Leadore, Idaho
Potlatch, Idaho (Potlatch Lumber Company)


Illinois
Granite City, Illinois, built by St. Louis Stamping Company, a steel company known for its "Granite ware" in which cooking utensils were made to look like granite
Hegewisch, Chicago, founded by Adolph Hegewisch (President of the United States Rolling Stock Company) to emulate the company town of Pullman.
Leclaire, Illinois, founded by N. O. Nelson (the owner of the Nelson Manufacturing Company) and named in honor of Edme-Jean Leclaire.
Pullman, Chicago, once an independent city within Illinois, owned by the Pullman Sleeping Car Co.
Naplate, built and formerly owned by the National Plate Glass Co.
Steger, Illinois, built and formerly owned by Steger and Sons Piano.


Indiana
Aetna, built by the Aetna Powder Company
Gary, Indiana, built and formerly owned by U.S. Steel
Marktown, built for the Mark Manufacturing Company in East Chicago
Sunnyside, built and formerly owned by Inland Steel in East Chicago


Iowa
Buxton, a camp of the Consolidation Coal Company, abandoned.
Cleveland, a camp of the Whitebreast Coal and Mining Company, outside Lucas, abandoned.
Everist, a camp of the Mammoth Vein Coal Company (later, the Empire Coal Company), abandoned.
Muchakinock, a coal camp of the Consolidation Coal Company, abandoned.
Newton, where the well-known Maytag company closed down in 2006.
Numa and its abandoned suburb Martinstown, former home of the Numa Block Coal Company.
Severs, south of Colfax camp of the Colfax Consolidated Coal Company, abandoned.
Stone City, a town built by local limestone quarry businesses. Today an unincorporated community.


Kentucky
Barthell, built by the Stearns Coal and Lumber Company in 1902.
Benham, built and formerly owned by International Harvester.
Blackey, built and formerly owned by Blackey Coal Company.
Blue Heron, ghost town built by Stearns Coal and Lumber Company.
David, built and formerly owned by Princess Elkhorn Coal Company.
Fleming-Neon, built and formerly owned by Elkhorn Coal Corporation.
Highsplint, built and formerly owned by High Splint Coal Company.
Jenkins, built and formerly owned by Consolidation Coal Company.
Lynch, built and formerly owned by U.S. Steel.
Midway, built and laid out by Lexington and Ohio Railroad in 1830.
Seco, built and formerly owned by South Eastern Coal Company.
Stearns, built by Stearns Coal and Lumber Company.
Stone, built and formerly owned by Pond Creek Coal Company. It was also owned by Fordson Coal Company and Eastern Coal Company.
Thealka, built and formerly owned by North East Coal Company.
Van Lear, built and formerly owned by Consolidation Coal Company.
Wayland, built and formerly owned by Elk Horn Coal Company.
Wheelwright, built and formerly owned by Elk Horn Coal Company.


Louisiana
Bogalusa, Louisiana, started by Great Southern Lumber Company
Cinclare, Louisiana, started by Harry L. Laws & Company
Elizabeth, Louisiana started by Industrial Lumber Company
Fisher, Louisiana, started by Louisiana Long Leaf Lumber Company
Fullerton, Louisiana, started by the Gulf Lumber Company
Garden City, Louisiana, started by Albert Hanson Lumber Company
Glenmora, Louisiana started by Louisiana Sawmill Company Ltd.
Kinder, Louisiana started by Peavy Byrnes Lumber Company
Long Leaf, Louisiana started by Crowell and Spencer Lumber Company
Pawnee, Louisiana
Stables, Louisiana, started by the Gulf Lumber Company


Maine
Chisholm, Maine, built by the Otis Falls Pulp & Paper Company
Hastings, Maine, built by the Hastings Lumber Company
Katahdin Iron Works, built by Piscataquis Iron Works Company
Millinocket, Maine, 20th century residential development for the Great Northern Paper Company mill
Milo, Maine, includes residential developments for employees of Bangor and Aroostook Railroad's Derby shops
Newhall, Maine, residences for employees of Oriental Powder Company
Rumford, Maine, includes residential developments by paper mill owner Hugh J. Chisholm
Westbrook, Maine, 20th century economy dominated by S. D. Warren Paper Mill


Massachusetts
Hopedale, Massachusetts, former home of the Draper Corporation, textile machine manufacturer.
North Dighton, Massachusetts, former textile mill town, greatly expanded during the 1910s–1920s.
Southbridge, Massachusetts, former mill town, known for the home of American Optical Company.
Whitinsville, Massachusetts, former home of Whitin Machine Works, textile machine manufacturer.


Michigan
Alberta, Michigan, started by Henry Ford
Gwinn, Michigan, owned by Cleveland Cliffs Iron, nicknamed the "Model Town", because CCI intended its layout to be a model for all of their other company towns
Hermansville, Michigan, started by the Wisconsin Land & Lumber Company


Minnesota
Akeley, Minnesota, developed by T. B. Walker and named for his business partner, Healy C. Akeley
Babbitt, Minnesota and Silver Bay, Minnesota, developed by Reserve Mining Co.
Elcor, Minnesota, developed by Pickands Mather & Company
Hoyt Lakes, Minnesota, developed by Erie Mining Co.
Morgan Park, Duluth, Minnesota, built by U.S. Steel and named for J.P. Morgan
Splitrock, Minnesota, developed by the Split Rock Lumber Company


Mississippi
Bankston, Mississippi, ghost town, former location of Bankston Textile Mill
Electric Mills, Mississippi, started by Sumter Lumber Company
Fernwood, Mississippi, started by Fernwood Lumber Company


Missouri
Deering, Missouri, established by Deering Harvester Company or its successor International Harvester Company and later acquired by Wisconsin Lumber Company, which eventually ceased operations and divested it
Grandin, Missouri, established by Missouri Lumber and Mining Company
Leadwood, Missouri, developed by St. Joe Lead
Trenton, Missouri, Ruskin College acquired all the businesses in the hopes of building a utopian society


Montana
Colstrip, Montana, a coal strip mining town formerly owned by Montana Power Company
Trident, Montana, a former Portland cement company town owned by Holcim


Nevada
Boulder City, Nevada, built and formerly owned by the United States Bureau of Reclamation
Empire, Nevada, owned by USG Corporation
McGill, Nevada, owned by Kennecott Copper Corporation
Ruth, Nevada, owned by Kennecott Copper Corporation
Weed Heights, Nevada, owned by Anaconda Copper Company


New Hampshire
Berlin, New Hampshire, residential development for wood products manufacturing by Berlin Mills Company
Harrisville, New Hampshire, historic textile mill village; National Historic Landmark


New Jersey
Haskell, New Jersey, named for Laflin & Rand company president Jonathan Haskell
Helmetta, New Jersey, built by snuff manufacturer, George Washington Helme of the Helme Tobacco Company and named after his daughter, Etta
Manville, New Jersey, the largest tract of land was the Johns Manville Corporation
Maurer, Perth Amboy built by brick manufacturer after the Civil War and later absorbed into Perth Amboy
Roebling, New Jersey, a factory village within the limits of Florence, New Jersey; the town was owned by the Roebling Steel Corporation run by the descendants of John A. Roebling


New Mexico
Madrid, New Mexico, residential development for miners of the Albuquerque and Cerrillos Coal Company
Playas, New Mexico, built by Phelps Dodge Corporation


New York
Cohoes, New York, formerly owned by Harmony Mills
Endicott, New York planned and incorporated by Endicott Johnson Corporation
Johnson City, New York renamed by and after George F. Johnson of the Endicott Johnson Corporation
Oneida, New York, incorporated 1848 by the Oneida Community which later became Oneida Limited
Steinway Village, the part of New York City in Astoria, Queens used by employees of Steinway & Sons


North Carolina
Bunn, North Carolina, a former company town previously owned by the Montgomery Lumber Company
Bynum, North Carolina, formerly owned by J.M. Odell Manufacturing Company (town purchased by the county in the 1970s)
Canton, North Carolina, a company town built-up by the Champion International Paper Company
Kannapolis, North Carolina, owned by the Cannon Mills Company
Saxapahaw, North Carolina, formerly owned by Sellers Manufacturing Company


Ohio
Glenwillow, Ohio, built by the Austin Powder Company
Goes Station, Ohio, built by the Miami Powder Company
Kings Mills, Ohio, built by the Great Western Powder Company and Peters Cartridge Company
McDonald, Ohio, built and formerly owned by the Carnegie Steel Company (later U.S. Steel)
Rossford, Ohio, founded by the Edward Ford Plate Glass Company (later Libbey-Owens-Ford)


Oklahoma
Broken Bow, Oklahoma
Wright City, Oklahoma, built by the Choctaw Lumber Company


Oregon
Algoma, Oregon, supported by the Algoma Lumber Company
Bradwood, Oregon
Brookings, Oregon, built by John E. Brookings and sold to California & Oregon Lumber Company
Dee, Oregon
Gilchrist, Oregon
Grand Ronde, Oregon
Hines, Oregon
Kinzua, Oregon
Maxville, Oregon
Mowich, Oregon
Neverstill, Oregon
Olney, Oregon
Orenco, Oregon, Oregon Nursery Company
Perry, Oregon
Pine Ridge, Oregon
Pondosa, Oregon
Powers, Oregon
Shevlin, Oregon
Southport, Oregon, owned by the Black Diamond Coal Mining Company
Starkey, Oregon
Valsetz, Oregon
Vanport, Oregon
Vaughn, Oregon
Wauna, Oregon
Wendling, Oregon
Westfir, Oregon
Wheeler, Tillamook County, Oregon
Wilark, Oregon


Pennsylvania
Aliquippa, Pennsylvania, former home of the Jones & Laughlin Steel Company
Ambridge, Pennsylvania, formed in 1905 by the American Bridge Company
Braddock, Pennsylvania, dominated by Carnegie Steel Company and later by U.S. Steel
Buck Run, Pennsylvania, built by James B. Neale between 1902 and 1943 for his anthracite coal miners and their families. By 1925, his company town boasted of a school, an infirmary, a community recreation facility, a company store and several churches in addition to homes for the miners with running water, electricity and steam heat. The Buck Run colliery was located outside of Pottsville, in Schuylkill County.
Ford City, Pennsylvania, organized in 1887 by PPG Industries
Hershey, Pennsylvania, built by Hershey Chocolate Corporation 
Kistler, Pennsylvania, built by the Mount Union Refractories Company in 1918, designed by John Nolen
Lake Trade, Pennsylvania, a now defunct coal mining town in Venango Township, Northern Butler County
Lawrence Park Township, Pennsylvania, built by General Electric Company in 1919
Natrona, Pennsylvania, built by the Pennsylvania Salt Manufacturing Company in the 1850s with later additions
Peale, Pennsylvania (1883–1912)
Saxonburg, Pennsylvania, founded by John A. Roebling and other German immigrants it was the site of his first wire works in the United States (see also Roebling, New Jersey)
Claghorn, Vintondale, and Wehrum, Pennsylvania, built by the Lackawanna Coal Company
Tacony, Philadelphia, built by Henry Disston for workers at his saw factory
Wilmerding, Pennsylvania, a borough formed by the Westinghouse Air Brake Company
Vandergrift, Pennsylvania, established by George McCurtry, President of Apollo Iron and Steel Company
Woolrich, Pennsylvania, the home of Woolrich, Inc.


Rhode Island
Slatersville, Rhode Island, historic former mill village


South Carolina
Newry, South Carolina
Piedmont, South Carolina


South Dakota
East Sioux Falls, South Dakota, an old quarrying town east of Sioux Falls, owned by the East Sioux Falls Quarry Company.


Tennessee
Alcoa, Tennessee, formerly owned by Alcoa and still economically dominated by the company
Bemis, Tennessee, built by the Bemis Bag Company for mill workers; now a history district in Jackson
Coalmont, Tennessee, operated by the Sewanee Coal, Coke and Land Company
Norris, Tennessee, built and formerly owned by the Tennessee Valley Authority
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, built in secret by the United States government for the Manhattan Project; controlled by the federal government until 1959
Old Hickory, Tennessee, built to house DuPont employees; now a suburb of Nashville


Texas
Camden, Texas, owned by the W.T. Carter & Brother Lumber Company and its successors
Lake Jackson, Texas, developed as a company town for workers of the Dow Chemical Company
Starbase, Texas, developed by SpaceX
Sugar Land, Texas, once owned and run by the Imperial Sugar Company, transformed into an upscale suburb of Houston
Thurber, Texas, owned by a coal-mining subsidiary of the Texas and Pacific Railway. It was the site of a large brick factory, using the mine's low grade coal


Utah
Bacchus, Utah, Hercules Powder Company, now a ghost town
Bingham Canyon, Utah
Bryce Canyon City, Utah, built and owned by Ruby's Inn and the Syrett family, owners of Ruby's Inn


Vermont
Proctor, Vermont, once owned by the Vermont Marble Company; the town of Proctor was under the control of Senator Redfield Proctor


Virginia
Bacova, Virginia, created by the Tidewater Lumber Company. The name Bacova was selected by the company as shorthand for Bath County, Va.
Bassett, Virginia, dominated by Bassett Furniture company, still housing the company's headquarters
Fries, Virginia, created by the Washington Mill.
Saltville, Virginia, dominated by Mathieson Alkali Works and its successors through the Olin Corporation
Stanleytown, Virginia was dominated by Stanley Furniture


Washington
Alpine, Washington, owned by Alpine Lumber Company
Barneton, Washington, owned by Kent Lumber Company, bought in 1911 by Seattle City Light, razed in 1924
Black Diamond, Washington, owned by the Black Diamond Coal Mining Company, sold to the Pacific Coast Company in 1904
Bodie, Washington, and its related Bodie Mine controlled by the Northern Gold Company
Bordeaux, Washington, logging town abandoned in the 1940s after depleting local resources
Coulee Dam, Washington, originally two adjacent company towns created in 1933 to support the construction of Grand Coulee Dam – Mason City, owned by lead construction contractor Consolidated Builders Inc., and Engineers' Town, owned by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. CBI transferred control of Mason City to Reclamation in 1942. Reclamation then combined Engineers' Town and Mason City into Coulee Dam in 1948, began selling the town to its inhabitants in 1957, and completed the divestiture in 1959, when Coulee Dam officially incorporated as a town.
Diablo, Washington is a running settlement in unincorporated Whatcom County, it was created by Seattle City Light in 1930
Dupont, Washington, provided housing to workers at a dynamite factory on the waterfront operated by E. I. du Pont de Nemours and Company.
Holden, Washington, built by the Howe Sound Mining Company, which also owned Britannia Beach; once the most productive copper mine in the U.S., the mine closed in 1957 and it and the townsite were sold to a unit of the Lutheran church for $1 in the 1950s; now run as a Christian retreat center
Hooper, Washington, owned by the McGregor Land and Livestock Company
Longview, Washington, established in 1921 by the Long-Bell Lumber Company and led by Robert A. Long the lumber baron from Kansas.
Newhalem, Washington, owned by Seattle City Light, as is nearby Diablo
Port Gamble, Washington, still owned by Pope & Talbot but the lumber mill has not operated since the mid-1990s
Richland, Washington, run by the Army Corps of Engineers during and after WWII to house Hanford Site workers
Roche Harbor, Washington, formerly supporting lime kilns owned by Tacoma and Roche Harbor Lime Company
Ruston, Washington, established by industrialist William Rust; the town's primary industry was an ASARCO copper smelting plant
Snoqualmie Falls, Washington, established by Weyerhaeuser. It was abandoned on an unknown date.


West Virginia
Cass, West Virginia, founded in 1901 for West Virginia Pulp and Paper Company logging the nearby mountains
Coalwood, West Virginia, formerly owned by the Olga Coal Company
Gary, West Virginia, formerly owned by U.S. Steel
Grant Town, West Virginia, built by the Federal Coal and Coke Company, which built and operated the Federal No. 1 Mine.
Kay Moor or Kaymoor, West Virginia, owned by the Low Moor Iron Company


Wisconsin
Fosterville, Wisconsin,  was built by John J. Foster of the Vilas County Lumber Company.  Now it is named Presque Isle, Wisconsin
Goodman, Wisconsin, built by Goodman Lumber Co.
Kohler, Wisconsin, built by the Kohler Company
Laona, Wisconsin, built by the William D. Connor's  Connor Company
Winegar, Wisconsin, Fosterville renamed by William S. Winegar of the Vilas County Lumber Company in 1910. Now named Presque Isle, Wisconsin


Wyoming
Bairoil, Wyoming became a company town supported by Amoco
Jeffrey City, Wyoming was built in 1957 to house employees of nearby Western Nuclear uranium mining and milling operations. Other uranium mining companies built housing adjacent to the town to take advantage of its location and infrastructure. The townsite was sold off in an auction in the 1990s.
Gas Hills, Wyoming was composed of several mining companies' towns, the largest of which was owned by Lucky Mc Uranium.
Shirley Basin, Wyoming was another uranium mining company town owned by Utah Construction and Mining's uranium operations.
Sinclair, Wyoming supported by Sinclair Oil.
Table Rock, Wyoming was built in the 1970s to support the nearby Colorado Interstate Gas processing plant.
Wright, Wyoming was built by ARCO in the 1970s to support its Black Thunder Coal Mine. Wright incorporated in 1985


References


Further reading
Carlson, Linda (2003). Company Towns of the Pacific Northwest. ISBN 0-295-98332-9. Archived from the original on 2009-01-19.
Susan, Campbell. Register of the KAU SUGAR COMPANY (Hutchison Sugar Plantation Company). Naalehu Hawaii.
Crawford, Margaret (1995). Building the Workingman's Paradise: The Design of American Company Towns. London & New York: Verso. ISBN 0-86091-695-2.

This is a list of notable amateur and professional snooker players, past and present.


A


B


C


D


E


F


G


H


I


J


K


L


M


N


O


P


Q


R


S


T


U


V


W


X


Y


Z


Notes


References

This list of tallest buildings in Kentucky ranks skyscrapers in the U.S. state of Kentucky by height. The tallest building in Kentucky is 400 West Market in Louisville, which rises 167 meters/549 feet and was completed in 1993.


Tallest buildings

This lists ranks Kentucky buildings that stand at least 250 feet (76 m) tall, based on standard height measurement. This includes spires and architectural details but does not include antenna masts. Existing structures are included for ranking purposes based on present height. Out of the 29 buildings, 17 of them are located in Louisville. Out of the remaining 12, 5 buildings are located in Lexington, 3 are in Covington, 1 in Frankfort, 1 in Richmond, and 1 in Bowling Green.


Tallest demolished


Timeline of tallest buildings


See also
List of tallest buildings in Louisville
Capital Plaza Office Tower in Frankfort demolished
PNC Plaza Bought With Embezzled Money in 2020 


References

Emporis.com Skyscrapers of Louisville
The Encyclopedia of Louisville
[1]

"Little Shocks" is a song by English indie rock band Kaiser Chiefs, taken from their fourth studio album The Future Is Medieval (2011). The song was written by Nick Hodgson, Ricky Wilson, Simon Rix, Nick Baines, and Andrew "Whitey" White. It was produced by Tony Visconti. It bubbled under at number 179 on the UK Singles Chart. The song was released and premiered on Zane Lowe's then-BBC Radio 1 programme on 30 May 2011.


Music video
A music video to accompany the release of "Little Shocks" was released on the same day, and was directed by Jamie Roberts. It is three minutes and fifty-two seconds long, and it features electrically based physics equipment, such as a Tesla coil behind the band, and Ricky Wilson in a Faraday cage.


Track listing


Chart performance


References

Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro was a Spanish Jesuit and philologist; born at Horcajo, 1 May 1735; died at Rome, 24 August 1809. He is one of the most important authors, together with Juan Andrés, Antonio Eximeno or Celestino Mutis, of the Spanish Universalist School of the 18th century.


Biography
Having entered the Jesuit order at Madrid, he studied at Alcalá de Henares, devoting himself with special zeal to architecture and linguistics. For a time he taught at the royal seminary in Madrid and at the Jesuit college of Murcia; then he went to the Americas as a missionary and remained there until 1767, when in connection with the abolition of the Jesuits the establishments of the Society were taken away from the order. Hervás now returned to Europe, taking up residence first at Cesena, Italy, then in 1784 at Rome. In 1799 he went back to his native land, but four years later left Spain and lived in Rome for the remainder of his life. He was held in high honour; Pope Pius VII made him prefect of the Quirinal library, and he was a member of several learned academies. In Italy he had a chance to meet many Jesuits who had flocked thither from all parts of the world after the suppression of the order. He availed himself diligently of the exceptional opportunity thus afforded him of gaining information about remote and unknown idioms that could not be studied from literary remains. The results of his studies he laid down in a number of works, first in Italian, and subsequently translated into Spanish.


Works


Idea dell' Universo
The greatest work of Hervás is the huge, Italian treatise on cosmography, Idea dell'Universo ("Idea of the Universe") (Cesena, 1778–87, in 21 vols. in 4to). It consists of several parts, almost all of which were translated into Spanish and appeared as separate works. 
Of these the most important, which had appeared separately in Spanish in 1784, is entitled Catálogo de las lenguas de las naciones conocidas, y numeración división y clase de éstas según la diversidad de sus idiomas y dialectos ("Catalog of the languages of the known nations, with a class division and numbering according to the diversity of its languages and dialects") (Madrid, 1800-5 6 vols.). Here Hervás attempts to investigate the origin and ethnological relationship of different nations on the basis of language. The main object of the book, therefore, is not really philological. 
Volume I covers American races and idioms, volume II those of the islands in the Indian and Pacific Oceans; the remaining volumes, devoted to the European languages, are inferior in value to the first two. The American dialects are certainly better described and classified than they had been before; the existence of a Malay and Polynesian speech family is established. For determining affinity in languages similarity in grammar is emphasized as against mere resemblance in vocabulary. While there were gross errors and defects in the work, it is conceded that it presented its materials with scholarly accuracy and thus proved useful to later investigators. 
Other parts of the work to appear separately in Italian and later in Spanish were:

Virilità dell' Uomo ("Manhood of Men") (4 vols., 1779–80)
Vecchiaja e morte dell' Uomo ("Old age and death of Man") (1780)
Viaggio estatico al Mondo planetario ("Ecstatic Journey around the World") (1780)
Storia della Terra ("The History of Earth") (1781–83, 6 vols.)
Origine, formazione, mecanismo ed armonia degl' idiomi ("Origin, formation, mechanics and harmony of Languages") (1785)
Vocabolario, Poliglotto, con prolegomeni sopra più de CL lingue ("Vocabulary, Multilingualism, with introduction to more than 150 languages") (1787)
Saggio practicco delle Lingue con prolegomeni e una raccolta di orazioni dominicali in più di trecento lingue e dialetti ("Wise Language practice with introduction and a collection of dominical prayers in more than three hundred languages and dialects") (1787)


Other works
Hervás wrote a number of educational works for the deaf, the most notable being La Escuela Española de Sordo-mudos ó Arte para enseñarles á escribir y hablar el idioma español ("The Spanish School of Art for Deaf-mutes, or the Art of teaching to write and speak the Spanish language") (Madrid, 1795). He also produced a number of controversial or theological tracts. 
Other miscellaneous works by Hervás include:

Descripción de los archivos de la corona de Aragón y Barcelona ("Description of the records of the kings of Aragon and Barcelona")(Cartagena, 1801)
Historia de la Escritura ("History of Writing")
Paleografía universal ("Universal Paleography")
Moral de Confucio ("the Moral of Confucius")
Historia de las primeras colonias de América ("History of the first American colonies")
El hombre vuelto á la religión ("The man turned to religion")


Linguistics
Some lenguas matrices (language families) listed by Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro are:

Tupí, Guaraní, Homagua [Omagua-Campeva], and “Brasile volgare” (Tupí-Guaraní languages)
Guaicurú [Kadiweu], Abipón, and Mocobí (Guaicuruan languages)
Lule and Vilela (Lule-Vilelan languages)
Maipure and Moxa [Moxo] (Arawakan languages)


References


Sources
Biography, newadvent.org. Accessed 23 February 2024.


External links

Lorenzo Hervás y Panduro. Polymath Virtual Library, Fundación Ignacio Larramendi

"Love Rollercoaster" is the eleventh episode of the first season of the American adult animated sitcom  The Cleveland Show. Written by Kirker Butler and directed by Ron Rubio, it originally aired on January 10, 2010, on Fox. In this episode, Roberta learns a lesson about looks.


Plot
Cleveland Jr. is building a model rocket for the school science fair which wins him first place. Roberta's new teacher, Ms. Eck (voiced by Jane Lynch) challenges Roberta to prove she can get by without her looks and has her alter her appearance by wearing a 'fat suit'. Her first day as 'Tyra' gets off in an inauspicious start when she is rejected by Federline and the teachers she previously had wrapped around her finger. Cleveland Jr. sees her alone in the cafeteria and warms up to her. When he shows her his model rocket, which is not only failing but is being outmatched by the geeks who are translating Klingon, she helps him with the design flaw. They win the science fair - probably because of the TIE fighters the rocket deployed to attack the geeks - and Ms. Eck gives Roberta an 'A' Grade for proving she has more than just looks. However, Cleveland Jr. falls in love with Roberta and when he tricks her into meeting the family while disguised as Tyra she has to admit her actions. Cleveland tells her she has to figure a way out of her predicament. She invents a story about moving to Alaska to avoid breaking Cleveland Jr.'s heart.
Meanwhile, Cleveland and the guys impressed by Holt's new 'Nasal Laser', set out to invent the next infomercial product. After bouncing ideas around they decide that a movable coaster for beers is just the item they need. The guys try to shut Cleveland out of his preferred name of the 'Roller Coaster' in favor of the 'Brew-Choo Train'. Cleveland decides to make their booth sign at the invention show using the name he prefers and is kicked out of the group. The guys show up and they tell him the invention already exists and they are being sued. It turns out he saw an ad on late night television while high and had forgotten about it. He gloats at first about the guys getting stuck with the lawsuit until they reveal they never took his name off the invention and HE is the one being sued. He gets off due to some legal maneuvering but comes up with a new idea...based on an invention he had seen earlier at the invention show. He is told he should lay off the weed.


Reception
The episode was viewed by 8.549 million viewers with an 18–49 rating of 4.2/10, making it the second most-viewed episode in its timeslot, but least viewed episode on FOX that night after The Simpsons and The Simpsons 20th Anniversary Special – In 3-D! On Ice!.
Emily VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a positive review, and especially praised Cleveland Jr.'s storyline, writing "there are times when I'll laugh at something Cleveland, Jr., says just because of the delivery of the line. It's a great voice, for one, but it's also coming from the one character the show seems to have completely thought out". Jason Hughes of TV Squad wrote that Jane Lynch was "woefully under-utilized", but praised Cleveland Jr.'s song. Ahsan Haque of IGN wrote that the storyline with Roberta and Cleveland Jr. "could have been handled in a crude lowbrow fashion" but instead it took "a nice heartwarming turn" He called the "Balls Deep" song "the strongest and catchiest musical number we've seen on the show so far" and rated the episode 8.6 out of 10.


References


External links
"Love Rollercoaster" at IMDb

The Luohe Formation is an Early Cretaceous geologic formation in China. It is located in the Ordos Basin, and records fossil dinosaur trackways.


Geology
The formation mainly consists of three lithologic members: the lower member is a dark purple-red and purple-gray massive mudstone with dark purple micro-thin bedded argillaceous siltstone, and grey-yellow thick-bedded conglomeratic sandstone with horizontal bedding and low-angle oblique bedding developed. The middle member consists of purple-red thin-bedded quartz-fine sandstone and fine-medium grained feldspathic quartz sandstone, generally with large tabular oblique bedding, cross-bedding and parallel bedding. The upper member consists of purple-red and grey-yellow massive mudstone, silty mudstone and thin-bedded argillaceous siltstone, with parallel bedding and low-angle oblique bedding developed.


Depositional environment
The Luohe Formation represents an aeolian dune field with interspersed interdune deposits. Sandstone wedges were identified at three different outcrops, representing infilling of thermal contraction cracks. This periglacial scenario is analogous to that of the Qiongkuai Lebashi Lake area, Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. This Cretaceous plateau desert was estimated to be around 3-4 km paleoaltitude at a subtropical latitude. 


Fossils
Likely deinonychosaurian and other small indeterminate theropod trackways have been identified in the Luohe Formation.


References

László Vadász (January 27, 1948, in Kiskunfélegyháza – January 3, 2005) was a Hungarian chess player who held the FIDE title of Grandmaster (GM). He was one of the strongest Hungarian players in the 1970s. In 1978 Vadász played as second reserve in the victorious Hungarian team in the Chess Olympiad of 1978, held in Buenos Aires. 
In 1980's his play tended to decline dramatically. His last Elo  was 2271, but he was considered inactive as he did not play any Elo-rated game after the 2000/01 Hungarian Championship. Vadász reached his highest Elo number in 2505 in January 1978.


References


External links
László Vadász FIDE rating history at OlimpBase.org

The MacGregor Plaque (or MacGregor Tablet, also King Den's sandal label) is an artefact that was probably found in the tomb of King Den at Abydos, and dated circa 2985 BCE. According to its inscriptions, the plaque was originally attached to the king's sandal. The plaque is displayed in the British Museum.
It is, with the depictions of Narmer, among the oldest images of a ruler.


Origin and description
The MacGregor Plaque is a tablet is made of carved ivory that measures 4.5 cm x 5.4 cm; it is about 0.2 cm thick. Images are engraved and fired into it. The artefact was probably found in the mastaba tomb of the ancient Egyptian king Den (First Dynasty), and dated circa 2985 BCE. It derives from the excavations of French archaeologist, Coptologist, and Egyptologist Émile Amélineau. The artefact is also known as MacGregor Tablet, also King Den's sandal label.
The plaque was acquired by the British Museum in 1922; before that it, was part of the MacGregor collection, collected by Reverend William Mcgregor from Liverpool. The plaque is displayed in the British Museum with the inventory number BM EA 55586.


Front side
On the front side, king Den is depicted. He wears a loincloth, a khat head-dress with a Uraeus-snake, and an animal tail which hangs down from the back of his skirt. Den is labelled with his Horus name. His pose belongs to the motif of the "slaying the enemy": the king has his right hand raised, holding a mace; with his left hand, Den holds an enemy in place with his hair. The enemy is already on his knees, but attempts to ward off the king's blow. He can be identified as an Asiatic on account of his hairstyle (goatee and braids).
Along the plaque we find a hieroglyphic inscription, with a left to right reading direction: "I was the one who completed the first strike to the east," accompanied by the jackal standard of the god Wepwawet. This inscription is telling us that king Den himself conducted his first victory against the easterners. The fact that it is very important to state that it is the "first victory" is telling us that more battles will come, that other battles were lost, and that other first dynasty kings were engaged in protecting and expanding Egypt's frontiers and territories: from Nubia with the A-group to the Easterners in the north. In the Palermo stone, in its third row that it is considered to belong to Horus Den, appears in the second register "Smiting the bedouins", that it could refer to this label, but with all likelihood it refers to subsequent campaigns, since this one happened in the second half of Den's reign.
This plaque is the earliest attestation for the long head-dress known as the khat. Horus Den is also the first king known to display the double crown, indicating us that he was an innovative and active developer of royal iconography.


Back side
On the other side of the plaque, a pair of sandals are depicted, although the left part is severely damaged by abrasion. According to its inscriptions, the plaque was originally attached to the king's sandal.


Cultural impact
The artifact appeared in A History of the World in 100 Objects.


References


Bibliography
Wolfgang Helck. Untersuchungen zur Thinitenzeit (= Ägyptologische Abhandlungen. Vol. 45). Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden 1987, ISBN 3-447-02677-4, S. 161 & 187.
R. B. Parkinson, Whitfield Diffie, Mary Fischer, R. S. Simpson. Cracking codes: the Rosetta stone and decipherment. Vol. 2. California Press, New York 1999, ISBN 0520222482, p. 74.
A. J. Spencer. Early Dynastic Objects (= Catalogue of the Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum.). British Museum, London 1980, ISBN 0-7141-0927-4, p. 65, No. 460.

Mahendragarh is a city and a municipal committee in Mahendragarh district in the Indian state of Haryana. It is nearly 100 kilometres (62 mi) from Gurgaon and comes under National Capital Region (India). The city has a mini secretariat along with a sub divisional court.


Etymology
Earlier Mahendragarh was known as Kanaud because it was founded and inhabited by Kanaudia Brahmins. In the 1860s it was renamed after Maharaja Mahendra Singh (r. 1721-1748 CE) of Patiala State who was gifted this area by the British East India Company for his help in crushing the Indian Rebellion of 1857 in this area.


Geography
Mahendragarh is located at 28.28°N 76.15°E﻿ / 28.28; 76.15. It has an average elevation of 262 metres (859 feet). Mahendragarh district is bounded on the north by Charkhi DadriBhiwani and jhajjar districts, on the east by Rewari district and Alwar district of Rajasthan, on the south by Alwar, Jaipur and Sikar districts of Rajasthan, and on the west by Sikar and Jhunjhunu districts of Rajasthan. It has five tehsils of Kanina, Narnaul, Ateli, Nangal Choudhary And Mahendergarh.
It is situated at the bank of Dohan River (which was a seasonal river), which is at the verge of extinction.


History

Fort of Kanod was built by Maratha ruler Tatya Tope in 1755 CE. In 1860, it came under the Patiala State during the British Raj]. ruler of Patiala, Narendra Singh, changed the name of Kanod Fort to Mahandragarh after his son Mahendra. Because of the name of the fort, this town came to be known as Mahendragarh and the name of Narnaul Nizam was changed to Mahendragarh Nizam.
It is said that Malik Mahadud Khan, a servant of Babar had settled a habitation here.
In 1948, with the formation of PEPSU, Mahendragarh territory from Patiala State, Dadri territory (Now Charkhi Dadri) from Jind and Bawal territory from Nabha State were constituted into Mahendragarh district with the headquarters at Narnaul. At that time, there were three tehsils, namely; Narnaul, Charkhi Dadri and Bawal and Mahendragarh was a sub-tehsil.
In 1949, Mahendragarh sub-tehsil was made a tehsil. In 1950, Bawal tehsil was broken up and 78 villages were transferred to Gurgaon district forming Bawal as a sub-tehsil and remaining villages were added to Narnaul and Mahendragarh. In 1956 the Rewari tehsil (except 61 villages ) was excluded from Gurgaon district and included in Mahendragarh district. The Charkhi-Dadri sub-division was excluded from Mahendragarh district and included in the newly constituted district of Bhiwani. In 1977, 81 villages of Rewari tehsil was constituted into Bawal tehsil. In 1978 the district comprised 4 tehsils (Mahendragarh, Rewari, Narnaul and Bawal). On 1 November 1989, Rewari and Bawal tehsils (taken from Mahendragarh district) and Kosli tehsil except 10 villages (taken from Rohtak district) were constituted into a new district of Rewari. Presently Mahendragarh district has 3 sub-divisions (Kanina, Narnaul and Mahendergarh), 5 tehsils (Kanina, Mahendragarh, Nangal Chaudhary, Ateli, Narnaul) and 1 sub-tehsil (Satnali).


Demographics
As of 2011 India census, Mahendragarh had a population of 23,977. Males constitute 53% of the population and females 47%. Mahendragarh has an average literacy rate of 76, higher than the national average of 75%: male literacy is 89%, and female literacy is 67%. In Mahendragarh, 14% of the population is under 6 years of age. Hindus constitute 98% of the population. This area produce good and strong built soldiers. Maximum house found with participation in WW-1 & WW-2.
In spite of being a district headquarters, there is no administrative office. All the relevant work is done in Narnaul. The very first guggul (Commiphora wightii) vatika (place where medicinal plants are planted) was established here.
Now many government offices have opened in Mahendragarh near Government Boys college in new Court.


Education
Bharatiya Senior Secondary School
Rao Pahlad Singh Senior Secondary school


Social groups
According to Haryana District Gazetteers: Mahendragarh Yadavs form the agricultural backbone of the district. However Yadavs are in majority in the district.


Notable people
Satish Kaushik - Indian film director, producer and actor.
Gujarmal Modi - founder of Modi Industries and Modi Nagar.
Swami Ramdev - Yoga Guru and Co founder of Patanjali Ayurveda.


References

The Makana Local Municipality council consists of twenty-seven members elected by mixed-member proportional representation. Fourteen councillors are elected by first-past-the-post voting in fourteen wards, while the remaining thirteen are chosen from party lists so that the total number of party representatives is proportional to the number of votes received. In the election of 1 November 2021 the African National Congress (ANC) won a majority of fourteen seats.


Results
The following table shows the composition of the council after past elections.


December 2000 election

The following table shows the results of the 2000 election.


March 2006 election

The following table shows the results of the 2006 election.


May 2011 election

The following table shows the results of the 2011 election.


August 2016 election

The following table shows the results of the 2016 election.


November 2021 election

The following table shows the results of the 2021 election.


By-elections from November 2021
The following by-elections were held to fill vacant ward seats in the period since the election in November 2021.


References

Maksym Ivanovych Mudryi (Ukrainian: Максим Іванович Мудрий; born 5 May 2003) is a Ukrainian professional footballer who plays as a central midfielder for Ukrainian First League club Nyva Ternopil.


Career


Lviv
He made his professional debut for Lviv in the losing Ukrainian Cup match against Vorskla Poltava on 30 September 2020.


References


External links
Maksym Mudryi at UAF  (in Ukrainian)

Eva Malin Maria Gjörup (28 April 1964 – 20 May 2020) was a Swedish actress, mezzo-soprano, and arts administrator. She was sister to the actress, Fanny Gjörup (1961–2001), and stepdaughter to actor Håkan Serner.


Early life and education
Gjörup was born in Luleå, the daughter of Annette Bogeland and Henning Gjörup. Her mother married actor Håkan Serner in 1970. She studied at Malmö Academy of Music, where she earned a diploma in 1992.


Career
Gjörup performed at the Gothenburg City Theatre, National Swedish Touring Theatre, and Folkoperan. She had small roles in several films, including Ingmar Bergman's Cries and Whispers (1972). She worked at Svenska konsertbyrån, and as a producer at Gävle Symphony Orchestra. Later, she worked at the Norrlandsoperan in Umeå, Sweden, where she became opera manager and program manager for its symphony orchestra.
Gjörup made several recordings.


Personal life
Gjörup married fellow performer Fredrik Zetterström in 1999. She died in May 2020, aged 56, from a sudden cerebral haemorrhage.


Filmography


References


External links
Malin Gjörup at IMDb

Marianivka (Ukrainian: Маріанівка) is a village in Bila Tserkva Raion, Kyiv Oblast of central Ukraine. It belongs to Kovalivka rural hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine.
Marianivka is known for being the birthplace of Ivan Kozlovsky. It has a music school built by him in 1970.


History
Village Mar'yanivka was founded in the 12th century. The first inhabitants settled on the flow of the river Ros’ - Rotok. Previously, Ros’ was Rotok tributary run through the modern village Marianivka. From year to year Rotok became shallow and turned into a swamp. On the south-west of the village Marianivka there was a fortified town Perep'yatyha.
It was a stone wall fence around the town. There was a high castle of Prince and Princess Perep'yata and Perep'yatyha (her name was Marianna). Many centuries ago Prince Perep'yat left Kyiv with his army to far places. During two years there were no news from him, so the princess thought the prince was killed in some battle, and she bored very much. However, disturbing news was spread about approaching unknown big army to Kyiv. Princess decided to go with her own small army toward that threatening army. At dawn two military camps near Fastov came and started fighting. There was dense fog. Two armies fought invincible until the sun rose. The first sunlight fell on the killed Prince Perepyat. The battle was stopped; Perepyatyha cried, and her soldiers in despair surrounded her. She drew the sword and fell dead next to her husband. They were buried together. There are two graves that were named - Perepyat and Perepyatyha (newspaper «Shlyah Illicha» No. 30 (332) for 1964.)
Memory of them survived to our days through the name of the graves that are near Marianivka. There are about 54 tombs around Marianivka and 53 tombs near Fastivets. However the highest of them is Perepyatyha and less - Varenska. These graves show the brutal fighting that took place in those areas. Due to frequent battles city Perep'yatyha was destroyed.
In literacy Andrew Bogolyubskii from Pechersk monastery also mentioned about the tombs of Perep'yat and Perep'yatyha. Around Marianivka there is the largest number of graves. Therefore, there is no doubt that Marianivka (named in honor of Princess Mariana Perepyatyha) was settled many centuries ago and had another name.
In 1774 Bila Tserkva, like other old Russian cities, was presented to the Polish king, and he distributed them to his lords. City Bila Tserkva and surrounding lands of 100 thousand people have been donated to Xavier Branicki. In the middle of the nineteenth century these lands were divided among children of Xavier - Alexander, Vladislav and Konstantin. Branicki had lands in possession of Vasylkiv, Kanev, Zvenigorod, Cherkasy, Radomysh areas. Dimensions possessions: Alexander - 28,076 dessiatinas, Vladislav - 131,583 tithing, Constantine - tithes 47,326 TOTAL - 206,985 tithing. The audit report of villagers (males) showed 40,740 people. Orthodox (Ukrainian) population of Marianivka was assigned to the parish in Xavier village and Catholic (Polish) population - to the parish in Motovilovka. In the second half of the 18th century there were people of Orthodox – 1,177 and Catholics - 117. Later, ownership of the city Bila Tserkva in Kyiv region referred to Countess Alexandra Branicki. She had 99 estates, managed by her relatives. Branicki often sold lands to Polish people that came and inhabited close to each other. This way was organized a settlement that was named second Marianivka. Village Marianivka was a private possession of  Polish Countess Yastrubovski, and at that time the village had more than 568 yards and 3,009 inhabitants.
Marianivka was previously located in Vasylkiv Raion. The raion was abolished that day as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Kyiv Oblast to seven. The area of Vasylkiv Raion was split between Bila Tserkva, Fastiv, and Obukhiv Raions, with Marianivka being transferred to Bila Tserkva Raion.


References

Marie Pélissier or sometimes Pelissier (1706/07 – March 21, 1749) was a French operatic soprano. At the Paris Opera in 1722, she began her career, which was noted for her artistic skill and a scandal, until her retirement in 1741.


Career and scandal
Pélissier debuted at the Paris Opera in 1722, soon thereafter marrying Victor Pélissier and appearing at his theater in Rouen. She returned to Paris after his bankruptcy, singing at the Paris Opera again on May 16, 1726 in a performance of Pascal Collasse's Thétis et Pélée, in which she won great plaudits. Later in the year she created the role of Thisbé in Pirame et Thisbé by François Francoeur and François Rebel. Her performance attracted the notice of Catherine-Nicole Le Maure, who returned from a retirement and incited a rivalry which grew to include their respective supporters, the mauriens and the pélissiens as well. This conflict included "disputes" during the first run of Pirame et Thisbé.
A scandal involving the theft of gold and money from her lover, François Lopez Dulis, led to Pélissier's dismissal on February 15, 1734, whereupon she fled to London. She was back at the Paris Opera on April 19, 1735, remaining there until retiring in October 1741.


Artistry
Pélissier has been described as having a small voice whose production was, at least at the start of her career, somewhat forced. Even so, she was held by many to be the equal of Marie Le Rochois "in the emotional power of her declamation and movements". Audiences, namely Voltaire, compared her skilled artistry to Le Maure's exceptional vocal talent.
Pélissier created many roles, including five for Jean-Philippe Rameau alone: Aricia in Hippolyte et Aricie in 1733; Emilie in Les Indes galantes in 1735, Telaira in Castor et Pollux in 1737, and Iphise in both 1739's Les fêtes d'Hébé, ou Les talents lyriques and Dardanus. François-Hubert Drouais painted a portrait of Pélissier.


References

Mark Anthony Noske (born 25 July 1975) is a former Australian racing car driver. He has scored round wins in various Australian championships including the Australian Drivers' Championship, the Australian Formula Ford Championship and the Australian Nations Cup Championship.


Formula Racing
The son of former 1980's Sprintcar and Group A racer Tony Noske, Mark started in Formula Ford in Australia in 1992 after three seasons of Karting finishing fourth in 1994 and third in 1995 championships. In 1997 and 1998, he entered the Formula Holden class finishing sixth and third respectively. He made a brief return in 2002 for two races only. He competed in the US Formula Ford 2000 series.


Touring/GT Racing
Noske raced for Allan Moffat Racing at the 1995 Bathurst 1000, Gibson Motorsport at the 1996 Sandown 500 and Bathurst 1000 and the Holden Racing Team in 1997/98. His only full season was in 1999 driving for the Holden Young Lions program. He continued as a co-driver for endurance events and was drafted into the vacant Lucas Dumbrell Motorsport seat for the remainder of the 2010 V8 Supercar Championship Series.
Noske tried GT racing in the Australian Nations Cup finishing third in 2000 and seventh in 2001, both years driving a Ferrari 360 Challenge for Prancing Horse Racing. In 2011 he stood in for an ill Jason Richards as a guest driver at the Australian Carrera Cup Championship third round in Townsville.
Noske has also done selected Production Car Racing mainly in long-distance events. His best finish was in the 1995 Eastern Creek 12 Hour finishing third driving a Porsche 911 RSCS.


Results


Career results


Complete Bathurst 1000 results


References


External links
Speedsport Magazine Race Driver Database: Mark Noske
VESRIX: Driver Profile: Mark Noske
Mark Noske career summary at DriverDB.com

Marleen is a Dutch-language feminine given name. It can be a contraction of Maria and either Magdalena or Helena. People bearing the name include:

Marleen Barth (born 1964), Dutch politician
Marleen S. Barr (born 1953), American academic and author
Marleen Clemminck (born 1958), Belgian racing cyclist
Marleen Daniels (born 1958), Belgian photographer
Marleen Gorris (born 1948), Dutch writer and director
Marleen van Iersel (born 1988), Dutch beach volleyball player
Marleen Kuppens (born 1959), Belgian sprint canoer
Marleen de Pater-van der Meer (1950–2015), Dutch politician
Marleen Renders (born 1968), Belgian long-distance runner
Marleen van Rij (born 1950), Dutch rower
Marleen Temmerman (born 1953), Belgian politician
Marleen Vanderpoorten (born 1954), Belgian/Flemish politician
Marleen Veldhuis (born 1979), Dutch swimmer
Marleen Wissink (born 1969), Dutch football goalkeeper


See also
"Marleen" (Australian Playhouse), A 1966 Australian TV play
"Lili Marleen", a German song
Marlene (given name)


References

The Marshall Indians were a minor league baseball team based in Marshall, Texas, United States that played from 1923 to 1927 in the East Texas League (1923–1926) and Lone Star League (1927). Notable players include Homer Peel, George Watkins and Elon Hogsett. The team finished with a winning record only once over the course of its existence, and it never finished above third place in the league.


References

In astronomy, astrophysics and geophysics, a mass concentration (or mascon) is a region of a planet's or moon's crust that contains a large positive gravity anomaly. In general, the word "mascon" can be used as a noun to refer to an excess distribution of mass on or beneath the surface of an astronomical body (compared to some suitable average), such as is found around Hawaii on Earth. However, this term is most often used to describe a geologic structure that has a positive gravitational anomaly associated with a feature (e.g. depressed basin) that might otherwise have been expected to have a negative anomaly, such as the "mascon basins" on the Moon.


Lunar mascons
The Moon is the most gravitationally "lumpy" major body known in the Solar System. Its largest mascons can cause a plumb bob to hang about a third of a degree off expected vertical, pointing toward the mascon, and increase the force of gravity by one-half percent.
Typical examples of mascon basins on the Moon are the Imbrium, Serenitatis, Crisium and Orientale impact basins, all of which exhibit significant topographic depressions and positive gravitational anomalies. Examples of mascon basins on Mars are the Argyre, Isidis, and Utopia basins. Theoretical considerations imply that a topographic low in isostatic equilibrium would exhibit a slight negative gravitational anomaly. Thus, the positive gravitational anomalies associated with these impact basins indicate that some form of positive density anomaly must exist within the crust or upper mantle that is currently supported by the lithosphere. One possibility is that these anomalies are due to dense mare basaltic lavas, which might reach up to 6 kilometers in thickness for the Moon. While these lavas certainly contribute to the observed gravitational anomalies, uplift of the crust-mantle interface is also required to account for their magnitude. Indeed, some mascon basins on the Moon do not appear to be associated with any signs of volcanic activity. Theoretical considerations in either case indicate that all the lunar mascons are super-isostatic (that is, supported above their isostatic positions). The huge expanse of mare basaltic volcanism associated with Oceanus Procellarum does not possess a positive gravitational anomaly.


Origin of lunar mascons
Since their identification in 1968 by Doppler tracking of the five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft, the origin of the mascons beneath the surface of the Moon has been subject to much debate, but they are now regarded as being the result of the impact of asteroids during the Late Heavy Bombardment.


Effect of lunar mascons on satellite orbits
Lunar mascons alter the local gravity above and around them sufficiently that low and uncorrected lunar orbits of satellites around the Moon are unstable on a timescale of months or years. The small perturbations in the orbits accumulate and eventually distort the orbit enough for the satellite to impact the surface.
Because of its mascons, the Moon has only four "frozen orbit" inclination zones where a lunar satellite can stay in a low orbit indefinitely. Lunar subsatellites were released on two of the last three Apollo crewed lunar landing missions in 1971 and 1972; the subsatellite PFS-2 released from Apollo 16 was expected to stay in orbit for one and a half years, but lasted only 35 days before crashing into the lunar surface since it had to be deployed in a much lower orbit than initially planned. It was only in 2001 that the mascons were mapped and the frozen orbits were discovered.
The Luna 10 orbiter was the first artificial object to orbit the Moon, and it returned tracking data indicating that the lunar gravitational field caused larger than expected perturbations, presumably due to "roughness" of the lunar gravitational field. The Lunar mascons were discovered by Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren of the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in 1968 from a new analytic method applied to the highly precise navigation data from the uncrewed pre-Apollo Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. This discovery observed the consistent 1:1 correlation between very large positive gravity anomalies and depressed circular basins on the Moon. This fact places key limits on models attempting to follow the history of the Moon's geological development and explain the current lunar internal structures.
At that time, one of NASA's highest priority "tiger team" projects was to explain why the Lunar Orbiter spacecraft being used to test the accuracy of Project Apollo navigation were experiencing errors in predicted position of ten times the mission specification (2 kilometers instead of 200 meters). This meant that the predicted landing areas were 100 times as large as those being carefully defined for reasons of safety. Lunar orbital effects principally resulting from the strong gravitational perturbations of the mascons were ultimately revealed as the cause. William Wollenhaupt and Emil Schiesser of the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston then worked out the "fix" that was first applied to Apollo 12 and permitted its landing within 163 m (535 ft) of the target, the previously landed Surveyor 3 spacecraft.


Mapping
In May 2013 a NASA study was published with results from the twin GRAIL probes, that mapped mass concentrations on Earth's Moon.
China's Chang’e 5T1 mission also mapped Moon's mascons. 


Earth's mascons
Mascons on Earth are often measured by means of satellite gravimetry, such as the GRACE satellites.
Mascons are often reported in terms of a derived physical quantity called "equivalent water thickness", "equivalent water height", or "water equivalent height", obtained dividing the surface mass density redistribution by the density of water.


Mercurian mascons
Mascons exist on Mercury.  They were mapped by the MESSENGER spacecraft which orbited the planet from 2011 to 2015.  Two are shown in the image at right, at Caloris Planitia and at Sobkou Planitia.


See also
Lunar orbit § Perturbation effects and low orbits


References

Matthew, Matt, or Matty Taylor may refer to:


Arts
Matthew Taylor (bassist), American member of the band Motion City Soundtrack
Matthew Taylor (composer) (born 1964), English composer
Matt Taylor (musician) (born 1948), Australian blues musician
Matthew Taylor (musician) (1968–2026), American musician, member of the band Bellini
Maddie Taylor (born 1966), American voice actress, formerly known as Matthew Taylor
Matthew Taylor (sculptor) (1837–1889), English sculptor


Sport
Matthew Taylor (footballer, born 1981), English football full-back and manager
Matt Taylor (footballer, born 1982), English football centre-back and manager
Matty Taylor (footballer, born 1990), English football striker
Matthew Taylor (cricketer, born 1973), English cricketer
Matt Taylor (New Zealand cricketer) (born 1992), New Zealand cricketer
Matthew Taylor (cricketer, born 1994), English cricketer
Matthew Taylor (cricketer, born 1999), Welsh cricketer
Matt Taylor (American soccer) (born 1981), American soccer assistant manager for Real Salt Lake and former forward
Matt Taylor (canoeist) (born 1970), American slalom canoer
Matt Taylor (rugby union) (born 1972), Scottish rugby coach
Mattie Taylor (born 1993), Irish Gaelic football right wing-back
Matthew Taylor (field hockey) (born 2001), Scottish field hockey player


Politics
Matthew Taylor (political strategist) (born 1960), formerly adviser to Tony Blair and director of the IPPR
Matthew Taylor, Baron Taylor of Goss Moor (born 1963), Cornish former Liberal Democrat MP
Matt Taylor (politician) (born 1973), Australian politician


Other
James Madison Taylor (fl. 1868–1886), aka Matt Taylor, early Idaho settler and builder of the Taylor bridge in what is now Idaho Falls
Matt Taylor (meteorologist) (born 1976), BBC weather presenter
Matthew Taylor (architect) (born 1975), architect and campaigner
Matt Taylor (scientist) (born 1973), project scientist of the Rosetta mission
Matthew Taylor, author of Techmoan YouTube channel


See also
Taylor (disambiguation)
List of people with surname Taylor

Mauriciosaurus (meaning "Mauricio [Fernández Garza's] reptile") is a genus of polycotylid plesiosaur from the Late Cretaceous of Mexico. It contains a single species, M. fernandezi (also named after Fernández Garza), described in 2017 by Eberhard Frey and colleagues from a single well-preserved juvenile specimen about 2 metres (6 ft 7 in) long. Morphologically, it is overall most similar to the polycotyline polycotylids Trinacromerum and Dolichorhynchops. However, several features separate Mauriciosaurus from all other polycotylids, warranting the naming of a new genus. These include the sophisticated pattern of ridges on the bottom of the parasphenoid bone on its palate; the narrow openings in the palate bordered by the pterygoid bones; the lack of perforations in the surface of the coracoid; and the highly unusual arrangement of gastralia, or belly ribs, which is only otherwise seen in the non-polycotylid Cryptoclidus.
Partially as a consequence of the oxygen-poor environment that the specimen was preserved in, the type specimen Mauriciosaurus is notable for possessing well-preserved soft-tissues. In life, each of its four flippers bore a flexible trailing edge such that they formed hydrofoils, and contour fat created a drop-like outline of the body by merging the torso and immobile tail into a single unit. Both of these soft-tissue traits would have improved the animal's hydrodynamic performance, making it a fast swimmer comparable to modern leatherback sea turtles. Additionally, a heavily-pigmented lining protected the organs of the body cavity from UV exposure. After death, the sediment allowed the contour fat to preserve into adipocere instead of putrefying, which preserved most of the epidermal soft tissue save for that of the belly.
The oxygen-poor deposits that Mauriciosaurus was preserved in, collectively known as the Vallecillo plattenkalk, would have represented the bottom of a continental shelf about 500 kilometres (310 mi) offshore in the prehistoric Gulf of Mexico. Inoceramid bivalves represent the only endemic benthic fauna at the site; other fossil organisms known from Vallecillo include invertebrates such as ammonites and barnacles that grew on those ammonites, as well as vertebrates consisting of various fish, aigialosaurid mosasaurs, and turtles. The type specimen of Mauriciosaurus is associated with an ammonite, Mammites nodosoides, which is present only in the Turonian interval of the Vallecillo deposits, allowing it to be dated to that age.


Discovery and naming

The type and only known specimen of Mauriciosaurus was found in the summer of 2011 by workers at a laminated limestone quarry near the town of Vallecillo, in the state of Nuevo León, Mexico. It is labelled under the collection number INAH CPC RFG 2544 P.F.1 (INAH standing for the Instituto Nacional de Antropología e Historia, or National Institute of Anthropology and History) at the Museo del Desierto in Saltillo, Coahuila, Mexico; currently, however, it is on display currently at the Museo Papalote Verde in Monterrey, the capital of Nuevo León. The specimen has been broken into 28 slabs, which collectively preserve a nearly-complete and articulated skeleton, missing only the left coracoid, parts of the flippers, and the tip of the tail (which were lost during collection by the workers).

 
INAH CPC RFG 2544 P.F.1 was found in a 7.7 metres (25 ft) section of laminated limestone mixed with marl, part of the plattenkalk Konservat-Lagerstätte (fine limestone deposits that exquisitely preserve animals) within the Cenomanian-Turonian Agua Nueva Formation. The plattenkalk is quite widespread, being largely concentrated around Vallecillo but spanning an area of 10,000 square kilometres (3,900 sq mi). Outside of these deposits, macroscopic fossils are relatively rare in the Agua Nueva. Detailed biostratigraphic zonation has been conducted for the Vallecillo plattenkalk; the presence of the vascoceratid ammonite Mammites nodosoides allows the slab containing Mauriciosaurus to be dated to the early Turonian portion of the plattenkalk.
Eberhard Frey, Eric Mulder, Wolfgang Stinnesbeck, Héctor Rivera Sylva, José Padilla Gutiérrez, and Arturo González González described the specimen in 2017, formally naming it as a new taxon in a paper submitted to the Boletín de la Sociedad Geológica Mexicana (Bulletin of the Geological Society of Mexico). The genus and species name, Mauriciosaurus fernandezi, is in honour of Mauricio Fernández Garza, who has provided the specimen for scientific study, in addition to providing funding for both research at Vallecillo and public science education in Nuevo León.


Description

Mauriciosaurus is a short-necked plesiosaur, bearing a drop-shaped body with a small tail. The type specimen of Mauriciosaurus would have measured 1.9–2.1 metres (6 ft 3 in – 6 ft 11 in) long in total, 1.5 metres (4 ft 11 in) wide at the flippers and weighed 79 kilograms (174 lb). However, this specimen is immature, judging by the lack of fusion in the cervical vertebrae; the coracoids bearing no forward projections that interlock with the clavicles; the thin bones of the shoulder and hip girdles; the lack of a ridge on the top surface of the scapula; the short ischia; and the presence of gaps (filled by extensive cartilage in life) between the long bones of the flippers. The palate is mineralized, suggesting that the specimen was still at least a subadult. Adult individuals would have grown up to twice the length of the type specimen.


Skull

The snout of Mauriciosaurus is round in cross-section and straight-sided. The bottom of the jaw is even, unlike Thililua where the jaw projects downwards at the level of the eye sockets. Each side of the upper jaw of Mauriciosaurus contain at least 42 teeth, including 4 in the premaxilla and 32 in the maxilla. All of the teeth are of the same shape, being four times taller than they are wide with conical and recurved tips; the smallest tooth, from the back of the mouth, is about a quarter the size of the largest. The gaps separating the teeth are a slightly wider than the teeth themselves. While it is hard to infer much about the precise arrangement of the teeth in life, the teeth of the upper and lower jaws probably would have been interlocking. Compared to other polycotylids, the teeth are smaller than those of Eopolycotylus, Pahasapasaurus, and Georgiasaurus, and more numerous than those of Trinacromerum (30-38) or Dolichorhynchops (26-30).
Most of the diagnostic characteristics in the skull of Mauriciosaurus are found on the palate. Like other polycotylids, the pterygoid bone of Mauriciosaurus bears a dish-like depression. Unlike both Trinacromerum and Dolichorhynchops, however, the depression does not span the entire bottom surface of the bone, and is instead restricted to the front portion. The back of the bottom surface of the pterygoid bears prominent ridges arranged uniquely in a W-shape; Polycotylus has a similar, albeit less complex, arrangement of ridges. Like Trinacromerum but unlike Dolichorhynchops, the tips of the processes extending out from the front of the pterygoids are significantly widened; it is three times as wide as the rest of the process in Mauriciosaurus, and twice as wide in Trinacromerum. Similarly, Mauriciosaurus and Trinacromerum both bear projections on the rear quarter of the pterygoid (a rounded tubercle in Mauriciosaurus, and a sharp ridge in Trinacromerum), whereas Dolichorhynchops lacks any such projection.
An additional trait shared between Mauriciosaurus and Trinacromerum involves the parasphenoid, which separates the pterygoid from the midline of the skull; the front of the parasphenoid is bifurcated in both, while it tapers to a single blunt point in Dolichorhynchops. The pterygoid and parasphenoid enclose three holes in the palate, the anterior and two posterior interpterygoid vacuities. The anterior interpterygoid vacuity is the largest of the holes in the palate, extending roughly from the 23rd to the 32nd tooth positions in the maxilla. Like other polyoctylids, the posterior interpterygoid vacuities are closed by the pterygoid. However, they are unusually narrow and oval-shaped in Mauriciosaurus, whereas they are wider and more rounded in Trinacromerum due to the concave inner margins of the pterygoid and parasphenoid. Meanwhile, on the lower jaw, the splenial contributes about 50% to the bottom surface of the jaw, which is more than Palmulasaurus and Eopolycotylus.


Vertebral column

Mauriciosaurus bore 21 cervical vertebrae, at least 23 thoracic vertebrae, and at least 25 in the sacrum and tail (the delineation between these two types is not clear, since it is obscured by the ischium). The centra of Mauriciosaurus are constricted on their outer surfaces, unlike the cylindrical centra of Trinacromerum. Both the cervical and thoracic centra have length-width ratios of about 2:3; the cervical centra are procoelous (concave in front and convex behind), whereas the thoracic centra are platycoelous (both surfaces are flat). The sacral and caudal centra are generally shorter, with length-width ratios of about 1:3, but they also become narrower such that the last several preserved caudal centra are twice as long as they are wide; the first caudal centrum appears to be opisthocoelous (convex in front and concave behind), while the rest are platycoelous (flat on both sides). Each caudal centra only articulated with one haemal arch at its back end, as opposed to one at each end in Dolichorhynchops.
Like other members of the Sauropterygia, the cervical vertebrae in the front half of the neck bore two pits on their bottom surfaces, separated by a median ridge; this ridge is abruptly replaced by a depression in the twelfth to eighteenth vertebrae, following which the ridge is present again. The same pits are present on the thoracic vertebrae, where they are separated by not one but two distinct ridges. An additional pit is present immediately beside each of the blunt keels that border the sides of the bottom face. The neural spines of the cervical vertebrae become taller and more inclined, with the seventeenth neural spine being as tall as the centrum and being inclined at an angle of 15°. Out of the thoracic ribs, the ninth is the longest, with rib size gradually decreasing on either side. All of the thoracic ribs bear only one articular facet; the third rib unusually has a facet that is strongly triangular in cross-section, which is probably an artifact of preservation.
A particularly unusual feature of Mauriciosaurus is its gastralia. There are six gastralia, each made up of a central V-shaped medial ossicle and various lateral ossicles attached to its sides. The second and third gastralia share a single medial ossicle, as do the fifth and sixth. The fourth medial ossicle is unusually massive, being about twice the thickness of the other medial ossicles. All of the gastralia converge to a single central point, which is a feature that is unprecedented among polycotylids, being only otherwise seen in Cryptoclidus. It is unlikely that this unusual arrangement is the product of taphonomic processes, since all of the gastralia seem to be preserved in alignment; the arrangement of the gastralia does not appear to be influenced by age either.


Limbs

In addition to the aforementioned forward projections, the trapezoidal coracoid of Mauriciosaurus differs from those of Dolichorhynchops and Trinacromerum in that it lacks perforations along its midline and at its back margin. While this may possibly be influenced by the specimen's young age, it is unusual that they are entirely absent at this stage of development. Additionally, unlike Eopolycotylus, the surface of the coracoid in Mauriciosaurus is largely smooth and devoid of pits (foramina). The front and back of the scapula are convex while the other edges are concave; the dorsal scapular process projects upwards from the outer edge. At the front of the scapula is a small ridge that probably would have supported an extension made of cartilage. Within the pelvis, the pubis is the largest bone, being a third larger than the ischium and six times larger than the ilium, which is not curved unlike Eopolycotylus. The rounded shape of the pubis can be attributed to the specimen's immaturity.
One of the traits that allies Mauriciosaurus with other polycotyline polycotylids is its slightly S-shaped humerus, which is approximately 1.6 times as long as it is wide. Like other polycotylids, the humerus is also shorter than the femur, but has a wider bottom end. The humerus does not have a bulge situated behind the humeral head, in contrast to Eopolycotylus. Neither the humerus or the femur bears an articular facet for the lower limb, unlike Trinacromerum. The primary epipodials - the radius and ulna on the front flipper, and the tibia and fibula on the hind flipper - meet along their entire lengths with no openings, and they are wider than they are long - all traits shared with other polycotylines. In Trinacromerum, however, these bones are less wide such that they appear to be roughly equal-sided.
Each flipper bore five digits; the second and fourth are the longest in the front flippers, and the fourth is the longest in the hind flippers. Across all of the flippers, the phalanges on the third digit have a length/width ratio of 1.77 - similar to Trinacromerum, longer than the 1.45 of Dolichorhynchops, and shorter than the 1.9 of Palmulasaurus. This may be indicative of Mauriciosaurus having retained the more primitive pattern of long phalanges. All of the phalanges in the digits interlock, like other polycotylids. Another trait Mauriciosaurus shares with other polcotylines is that it bears only three distal tarsals as opposed to four, with the second and third having fused into a single structure.


Soft tissue

There are five different types of soft tissue preserved in the type specimen of Mauriciosaurus. The first type consists of a largely amorphous glossy black material, bearing some traces of fibres, or wrinkles, which is preserved only within the body cavity, mostly on the right side of the torso. This most likely represents the heavily-pigmented peritoneum, which would have lined the inside of the body cavity in life. Another type of tissue consists of dark grey, thin, and rectangular structures 12 mm (0.47 in) long and 2 mm (0.079 in) wide, organized in parallel rows. They are found at the base of the neck, along the flanks of the torso, and behind the femur of the hind flipper. These likely represent the scale-like tubercles that would have covered the underside of the animal. At the junction between the femur and the body, they become larger, more trapezoidal, and radially arranged to form a folding surface; meanwhile, on the back edge of the flippers, these structures become sub-circular, which enhances the flexibility of the skin.
A third type of tissue, which is thick, red, amorphous, and sharply offset from the surrounding rock, likely represents remnants of decayed skin and subcutaneous tissue. The thickness of the preserved tissue may be a consequence of the skin's retention of flexibility after death, or the subcutaneous tissue being genuinely thick. Patches of this tissue are also found behind the left humerus and along the back edge of the right hind flipper; this suggests that each of the flippers bore a flexible trailing edge. An even thicker substance, which is dark red or dark grey, is also found at the back of the trunk as well as the bases of the right hind flipper and tail. This substance, which is crisscrossed by a series of straight furrows that divide it into rectangular or trapezoidal segments, is of unknown, but probably epidermal, provenance. Finally, a grey, glossy, amorphous substance, which forms a thick cone surrounding the base of the tail, probably represents subcutaneous fat.


Classification
 
In 2017, Mauriciosaurus was assigned to the Polycotylidae by Frey et al. based on characteristics of the pterygoid, mandible, humerus, and phalanges as previously described. Additional characteristics used to refer Mauriciosaurus to Polycotylidae included the reduced number of cervical vertebrae relative to other plesiosaurs in the Leptocleidia, as well as the presence of several additional ossifications supporting the epipodials of the flippers. Within the Polycotylidae, Mauriciosaurus could be assigned to the clade Polycotylinae based on the length/width ratio of the humerus, the lack of an opening (the antebrachial foramen) between the radius and ulna, the presence of three distal tarsals, the primary epipodials being wider than they are long, and the presence of more than twenty vertebrae in the trunk.
Within the Polycotylinae, Frey et al. considered Mauriciosaurus to be morphologically closest to Dolichorhynchops and Trinacromerum. Mauriciosaurus is more similar to Dolichorhynchops in the rounded ends of its humerus and femur; meanwhile, it is more similar to Trinacromerum in its expanded pterygoid rods, bifurcated front end of the parasphenoid, and relatively longer phalanges. It differs from both genera in the W-shaped ridges present on the back of the bottom surface of its pterygoid, as well as the possession of more tooth positions in the premaxilla and maxilla. In addition to these characteristics, others used by Frey et al. to diagnose Mauriciosaurus as a new genus included the narrow interpterygoid vacuities, the lack of perforations in the coracoids, and the highly specialized arrangement of the gastralia.


Paleobiology
Mauriciosaurus probably pursued small prey, due to its slender snout and small, pointed teeth. The soft tissue structures interpreted as the peritoneum of Mauriciosaurus would have been richly pigmented by melanocytes. In living squamates which reside in deserts or at high altitudes, pigmentation of the peritoneum protects the body cavity against solar ultraviolet radiation, thereby preventing damage to reproductive organs. As a surface-swimming plesiosaur, Mauriciosaurus would have been frequently exposed to solar radiation, and thus a pigmented peritoneum would have been advantageous particularly during the early stages of its life. However, a black peritoneum is also found in chickens and some teleost fish, in which its function is currently unknown.


Locomotion and body shape

Subcutaneous adipose tissue was likely responsible for streamlining the body of Mauriciosaurus, as is also seen in marine mammals. The presence of subcutaneous fat may account for the thick layers of tissue that constitute the third type of preserved soft tissue in the type specimen. On the tail, the small neural spines, haemal arches, and transverse processes suggest the hypaxial muscles of the tail were weak; the preserved cone of soft tissue around the tail thus plausibly represents contour fat, which served to stabilize the tail while continuing the outline of the torso onto the tail in a manner not unlike fat-tailed geckos and other geckos. This forms a "drop-shaped" hydrodynamic body outline, with the thickest part of the body being located in the front third, and the torso and tail forming a single cohesive unit.
As inferred from the soft tissue preserved behind the flippers, each of the flippers in Mauriciosaurus was heavily muscled and bore a flexible trailing edge made of skin. The trailing edge allowed each flipper to form a hydrofoil that would have enhanced locomotion, as has been previously hypothesized for plesiosaurs. Given the immobile body and the neck stiffened by overlapping cervical ribs, the flippers would have been the only source of locomotion. Overall, the anatomical features of Mauriciosaurus are reminiscent of contemporary sea turtles; in particular, the body outline of the leatherback sea turtle, Dermochelys coriacea, strongly resembles that of Mauriciosaurus. D. coriacea swims at an average velocity of 7 kilometres per hour (4.3 mph), which is consistent with estimates of the swimming speeds of Mesozoic marine reptiles; however, Mauriciosaurus would have been capable of attaining higher speeds due to involving all four limbs in locomotion.


Taphonomic considerations
Frey et al. hypothesized the thick contour fat of plesiosaurs such as Mauriciosaurus may account for the scarcity of preserved skin from members of the group. After death, in most cases, the rotting and putrefaction of the subcutaneous fat would have quickly broken apart the relatively thin skin. Mauriciosaurus, however, fell on its back into soft, soupy, water-soaked, and anoxic sediment of a temperature between 21–37 °C (70–99 °F). These conditions allowed the subcutaneous fat to condense into adipocere instead of decaying, which preserved the skin on the top half of the body. However, the exposed portions of the belly largely decayed prior to burial, collapsing the body cavity and gastralia.


Paleoecology

During the Turonian, the Vallecillo plattenkalk would have been part of a relatively flat (i.e. low relief) open-ocean deep shelf, located about 500 kilometres (310 mi) offshore at the junction between the Western Interior Seaway and the prehistoric Gulf of Mexico. Mauriciosaurus is thus the first juvenile polycotylid specimen known to have not been preserved in a shallow-water environment. The oxygen-poor seafloor would have prevented carnivores, scavengers, or substrate-dwelling animals from feeding on the deposited carcasses, explaining the quality of preservation along with the absence of waves or currents. In part, the anoxic conditions can be contributed to Oceanic Anoxic Event 2, which occurred at the Cenomanian-Turonian boundary.
Asides from Mauriciosaurus, a variety of invertebrates are also preserved in the Vallecillo plattenkalk. By far the most abundant benthic invertebrates are inoceramid bivalves, which may have lived in symbiosis with chemoautotrophic microbes in order to survive in the low-oxygen conditions.
Three species of Mytiloides are associated with the ammonite Mammites nodosoides at Vallecillo, and may thus have lived alongside Mauriciosaurus - namely M. kossmati, M. goppelnensis, and possibly M. mytiloides. Other ammonites that may have coincided with Mauriciosaurus included Pseudaspidoceras flexuosum, Watinoceras coloradoense, and a taxon referred to Vascoceras. The sessile barnacle Stramentum, which grew on ammonite shells, is also known from Vallecillo, but it is impossible to determine what point in time they originated from.
Other vertebrates are also present throughout the Vallecillo plattenkalk, mostly consisting of fish. Taxa that may have lived alongside Mauriciosaurus, from the Mammites nodosoides - Mytiloides kossmati biozone, include the holostean Paranursallia gutturosum, the pachyrhizodontid Goulmimichthys roberti, the plethodid Tselfatia formosa, and the alepisauriform Rhynchodercetis sp. Random surveys also revealed sharks, including Ptychodus mortoni, a lamniform, and the bizarre filter-feeding shark Aquilolamna milarcae; the enchodontoid Robertichthys riograndensis; the crossognathiform Araripichthys sp.; and an indeterminate notacanthid. Tetrapods are much rarer in the Vallecillo plattenkalk, consisting of the well-preserved back half of the aigialosaurid mosasaur Vallecillosaurus bearing soft-tissue impressions, three turtles representing two taxa, and a tooth referred to the pliosaur "Polyptychodon". However, "Polyptychodon" has more recently been considered a nomen dubium, with some of the teeth referred to the taxon being reclassified as those of polycotylids.


See also

List of plesiosaur genera
Timeline of plesiosaur research


References

Mela (transl. The Fair) is a 1948 Indian Hindi-language romantic tragedy film. It was produced by and directed by S.U. Sunny for Wadia Movietone. It starred Dilip Kumar, Nargis, Jeevan, Rehman and Nur Jehan. The film's music was composed by Naushad. Mukesh gave playback for Dilip in this film and one of the "Mukesh hits" was "Gaye Ja Geet Milan Ke". Mohammed Rafi's voice was used just once, for the popular song "Ye Zindagi Ke Mele", set in a fairground and picturised on a wandering mendicant at the start of the film. The lyrics of the songs were written by Shakeel Badayuni with story and dialogue by Azam Bazidpuri.
The musical film, set in a village milieu, was a tragic love story involving Manju and Mohan. Manju is married off to a seventy-year-old man, who declares that he didn't realise he was being married to someone so young. After the husband's death, the lovers meet and Manju dies accidentally. Mohan is convicted for her murder, and after spending twenty years in jail, he too falls off the cliff and dies when he follows Manju's spirit.


Plot
Manju (Nargis) lives in the village with her father, a school teacher, and stepmother. Mohan (Dilip Kumar) and Manju have been friends since childhood. The friendship develops into love and they are both excited about their wedding. Mohan decides to go into town to buy jewelry for the marriage. On the way he is robbed and beaten unconscious, landing him in the hospital.
Mehkoo (Jeevan), is a no-good man, retired from the army, who lusts after one of the young village girls. He is influential with Manju's stepmother and, with her by his side, calls the village panchayat. Here, he denounces Mohan as a cad who has run away with a girl, telling them that he won't return for the marriage. Since the wedding day has been fixed, the panchayat agrees with Mehkoo that Manju should get married on the day decided. It finds a supposedly suitable groom for Manju, but he turns out to be a seventy-year-old, sickly man. When he enters the wedding chamber, he agrees that Manju is too young to be his bride. Remorseful, he asks for forgiveness, but pleads with her to take care of his children. Manju takes on the role of the old man's wife. The man dies, with Manju now left as a young widow in charge of the children.
One night in stormy weather, she goes out to meet Mohan, and dies when she falls off a cliff. Mehkoo and other villagers arrive to convict Mohan of murdering Manju. Mohan says nothing in his defense and is sentenced to twenty years' imprisonment. On release from jail, Mohan goes to the same place where Manju had died. He sees her spirit, who beckons him to follow her. As he does, he falls off the cliff edge and dies.


Cast
Dilip Kumar... Mohan
Nargis... Manju
Jeevan... ex-army officer Mehkoo
Rehman
Amar
Roop Kamal
Allauddin... MasterJi
Abbas
Nurjehan
Chandabai
Khalil
Baby Zubeida


Production
The film, produced and directed by S. U. Sunny, was a Wadia Movietone presentation, with J. B. H. Wadia's wife Hila Wadia also listed in the credits as producer ("A Hila Wadia production"). Hila suggested that Jamshed Wadia make a film with music director Naushad, who was at the top of his musical career, having composed music for films like Rattan (1944), Anmol Ghadi (1946) and Shahjehan (1946). Following the success of Mela, Sunny set up his own production company, Sunny Art Productions, where he made films like Babul (1950), Udan Khatola (1955), and Kohinoor (1960).
Dilip Kumar was reportedly unwilling to act in Mela until he reached the studios and heard the opening lines of the song "Mera dil todnewaale", sung by Mukesh and Shamshad Begum. Kumar felt the story line was weak, in his words "absence of meat", and asked the screenwriters to accommodate changes in the script, which they did. As Kumar reports in his autobiography, Dilip Kumar: The Substance and the Shadow, "We had some healthy brainstorming sessions, which helped us to add depth and intensity to the story besides [as well as] logic". He felt the changes were good, both for him and the cast overall.


Review
The film came in for harsh criticism from the editor of Filmindia, Baburao Patel. In the December 1948 issue of the cine-magazine, he compared the "formula" used for the story as a "rehash of Rattan" (1944). His review elaborated a Parsi (Wadia) and Muslim (Bazidpuri) "conspiracy" to "run down the Hindus" by making a "stupid and reactionary" film like Mela. Calling the film a "slander on Hindus" and anti-social, he claimed it to be a film encouraging suicide, a criminal offense (section 309 of the Indian Penal Code). The army was slandered because the film made Mekhoo, an ex-army man, "the most objectionable character in the picture". He found "unbelievable" features in the story, especially the quick arrangement for Manju's wedding without looking for Mohan, and that a seventy-year-old widower remarrying wouldn't know the age of the woman he's going to marry.  
Patel commended the film for its "pleasant photography". Patel praised lead-female Nargis, but in her role of mother found her "unconvincing" and "synthetic". Dilip Kumar as the hero "does his job well". For Jeevan, who played Mehkoo: "Jeevan plays Mehkoo and succeeds in creating disgust and revulsion, the two main aspects of his role". Later, Patel lays on more anti-Parsi rhetoric when comparing Mehkoo's sexual assault of a girl, Basanti, to "those of some of the toddy-tight [drunk] Parsis on vacation".


Release and reception
The film was released on 8 October 1948 at Excelsior cinema, Bombay. The music of the film was a main part in the commercial success at the box office, with it being reportedly referred to as Naushad's "Golden jubilee (fifty weeks) Mela". According to Meghnad Desai, a weak story was camouflaged by the "stunning melodies" in Mela and other films.
The reported box office gross for the film according to IBOS was ₹50 lakhs in 1948. The adjusted gross as of 2015 is roughly estimated at ₹340.44 crores.


Remake
Chiranjeevulu (1956), a Telugu language film, was a remake of Mela. In the Telugu version, the hero is turned blind, and the old man who marries Manju is changed to a young bachelor, Dr. Krishna. The film was made under the Vinoda Productions banner, produced by D. L. Narayana (Dronamvajhala Lakshmi Narayana) and directed by Vedantam Raghavayya. The dialogue writer and lyricist was Malladi Ramakrishna Sastry. The film starred N. T. Rama Rao, Jamuna, Gummadi, Peketi Sivaram, C.S.R. Anjaneyulu. For actress Jamuna, it was cited as her "career-best performance"; Peketi Sivaram played the negative role of Mehkoo, originally played by Jeevan. The film "was a box office grosser".


Soundtrack
Composer Naushad had Shamshad Begum singing some memorable songs, in the process getting the "best out of Shamshad" for this film. "Dharti Ko Aakash Pukaare" and "Taqdeer Bani Banke Bigdi" by Shamshad are both notable songs, reportedly showing her growth as a "serious singer". The song "Dharti Ko Aakash Pukaare" was originally put in as a title song, but it became extremely popular, forcing the producers to have the full song added in the film.
Another popular song was the bidai (farewell) number, "Gaaye Jaa Geet Milan Ke" (Sing Songs Of Meeting), sung by Mukesh, at the time of Manju's departure from home after marriage. It was used in the film to show Manju's feelings, her "secret sorrows" that "cannot be voiced but are palpable" through the medium of the song. The song is sung by Mohan (Dilip Kumar) as he's racing home in his bullock cart to meet Manju (Nargis), whereas Manju is leaving for her husband's home.
Mohammed Rafi's popularity as a singer rose with the single song sung by him in Mela, "Ye zindagi ke mele".
Mela had music directed by Naushad with lyrics by Shakeel Badayuni. The singers were Mukesh, Shamshad Begum, Zohrabai Ambalewali and Mohammed Rafi.


Song list


References


External links
Mela at IMDb
Mela (1948) on YouTube

Mesmer may refer to:


People
Franz Anton Mesmer (1734–1815), German doctor who postulated Animal magnetism, and for whom Mesmerism is named
Gustav Mesmer, inventor of experimental human-powered flying machines
Sharon Mesmer, American writer born 1960 in Chicago, Illinois
Mesmer family of California, early settlers and developers of Los Angeles


Other
Mesmer (film), a 1994 film about the above
Mesmer, a 1997 novel by Tim Lebbon
Mesmer (album), a 2017 album by the Australian band Northlane
Mesmer, a concept in the List of concepts in Artemis Fowl


See also
Messmer (disambiguation)

Metal Slug Tactics is a turn-based tactics video game developed by Leikir Studio and published by Dotemu. A spin-off of the Metal Slug series, the game was released on November 5, 2024 for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X and Series S.


Gameplay

Unlike older Metal Slug titles which are run and gun video games, Metal Slug Tactics is a turn-based tactics game played from an isometric perspective. The world map is divided into regions with each culminating in a boss fight. Each region is further divided into several missions that players can complete in any order. Each mission has their own distinct objectives and rewards, and players must prioritize the resources they need while choosing which mission to tackle. The game introduces a structure commonly found in roguelike games. While individual squad members can be revived with reinforcement points during battle, players will be returned to the outpost if all characters are defeated, and must start the campaign again. At the outpost, players can upgrade the skills of each character, improve their weapons with mods, and purchase new items and weapons from vendors.
Players can choose three characters of the Peregrine Falcons squad for each mission. Each character has a primary weapon, which has unlimited ammo, a secondary weapon with limited ammo, and a distinct skill. Activating special abilities consume adrenaline, which is generated through movement in the battlefield, and attacking enemies. The game adopted a grid-based movement, and  players have two action points for each turn, one for movement while the other for performing an action. Enemies will attempt to attack the player in their turn, though they can hide behind cover to boost their defense. The more a player character moves in their turn, the higher their defense. By strategically placing characters in the battlefield, players can line up sync attacks. By attacking an opponent that is also within the line of sight of another character, a second attack by the other character will be triggered automatically. Players can also make use of environmental hazards to inflict damage on their enemies. Occasionally, players can deploy a tank into the battlefield, which allows the player to do devastating damage to enemies. Depending on the amount of fuel available, a tank can attack enemies with its weapon multiple times in a turn.


Development
Following the success of games such as Wonder Boy: The Dragon's Trap and Streets of Rage 4, SNK invited Dotemu to revive one of its dormant franchises. Metal Slug was chosen as it is one of the few franchises owned by SNK that is not a fighting game. Leikir Studio, which is based in Paris, served as the game's lead developer. Leikir pitched the project to SNK in 2018, and full development of the game commenced in 2019. SNK was not directly involved in the game's development, though it gave Leikir access to all the assets of the older Metal Slug games. However, the assets were not usuable in Tactics due to the change in gameplay perspective. Into the Breach served as an important inspiration for the studio, and paying homage to the franchise's action roots, the gameplay is speed-oriented despite being turn-based. The team introduced a variety of difficulty options for both fans of the turn-based tactics series, and players of the older games who are not familiar with this style of gameplay.
The game was officially announced by Dotemu in June 2021. Initially set to be released in 2023, the game's release date was subsequently delayed to late 2024 for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X and Series S.


Reception

Metal Slug Tactics received "generally favorable" reviews from critics, according to the review aggregator website Metacritic. OpenCritic determined that 68% of critics recommended the game.

Charlie Wacholz from IGN praised Metal Slug Tactics for its faithful adaptation, impressive pixel art, and engaging soundtrack. He noted that while the movement-focused gameplay and mechanics were strong, bugs and quality-of-life issues hindered the experience. Despite this, the game brought innovative elements to the tactics genre. Likewise, Abbie Stone from GamesRadar+ commended Metal Slug Tactics for its engaging gameplay and art style but noted that limited tutorials and technical issues, including crashes, affected its overall reception.


References


External links
Official website

Mez Breeze is an Australian-based artist and practitioner of net.art, working primarily with code poetry, electronic literature, mezangelle, and digital games. Born Mary-Anne Breeze, she uses a number of avatar nicknames, including Mez and Netwurker. She received degrees in both Applied Social Science [Psychology] at Charles Sturt University in Bathurst, Australia in 1991 and Creative Arts at the University of Wollongong in Australia in 2001. In 1994, Breeze received a diploma in Fine Arts at the Illawarra Institute of Technology, Arts and Media Campus in Australia. As of May 2014, Mez is the only Interactive Writer and Artist who is a non-USA citizen to have her comprehensive career archive (called "The Mez Breeze Papers") housed at Duke University, through their David M. Rubenstein Rare Book & Manuscript Library.


Work
 "Mez does for code poetry as jodi and Vuk Ćosić have done for ASCII Art: Turning a great, but naively executed concept into something brilliant, paving the ground for a whole generation of digital artists."
Breeze developed, and continues to write in, the hybrid language mezangelle. Her unorthodox use of language demonstrates the ubiquity of digitisation and the intersections of the digital and the real that are increasingly common in 21st century life. As well as creating static literary texts using mezangelle, Breeze also creates multi-disciplinary multimedia works online, and participates in online happenings that blur the lines between on- and off-line behaviour.


Code poetry
"These works are not content to let code remain below the surface but rather show it erupting through the surface of the screen to challenge the hegemony of alphabetic language."
Mezangelle is a type of poetry Breeze developed in the 1990s using Internet text language found in ASCII codes, online games, and other forms of Internet communication. For example, Breeze titled her 2022 work "[Por]TrAIts" where the capitalization of AI represents the subject of the book (a collaboration between a human and an AI writer).  "Mezangelle" refers both to the works themselves and the hybrid language in which they are composed—codeworks of this sort "playfully utilize programming terminology and syntax" alongside "human-only" or so-called natural language, creating a creolised language that combines human language and code. In these works, the primary message is semantically overcoded in such a way that multiple different readings are made possible. For example, the word 'mezangelle' itself is sometimes written as 'm[ez]ang.elle', which itself demonstrates the ways in which punctuation and non-alphabetical symbols (in this case the period and square brackets) disrupt and erupt through the human readable language. The word "mezangelle", itself a neologism, is fractured into multiple fragments that may allude to the words '"Mez", "ez" (easy), "mangle", "angle", "angel", and "elle", along with many possible others. This hybridisation of human-only and digital languages demonstrates both the reliance of human language upon connotation and context, and the inclusion of code in everyday digital communications.
Breeze also creates games in which texts in mezangelle are combined with images and sound. These works are often fragmentary or chaotic, as they rely both upon the polysemic nature of mezangelle and the inherent possibilities of computer programming for the display of dynamic audiovisual elements.


Online interventions
Breeze also explores and exploits environments that involve online socialisations or encounters. Such encounters involve the modification of online gaming environments, such as World of Warcraft, EVE Online, and social networking and alternate gaming software. As a member of the online group Third Faction, Breeze has been involved in a number of in-game projects within World of Warcraft, with the aim of disrupting and challenging the combative structure of the game. In this way, Breeze challenges the assumed binary division between the online environment and the real world, and acts to subvert the factionalised “confrontational player-vs-player interaction” that the game world tries to enforce. Breeze's use of multiple avatars for her digital works further emphasises the breakdown of the division between digital and real selves.


List of works
V[R]erses in the New River (Fall 2020). Work is described as a microstory in virtual reality where text nodes are embedded in a three-dimensional form, with a sound loop in the background.  Users can control the sequence or leave in an autopilot mode.
All the Delicate Duplicates (2017) is described as a literary walking simulator game where the reader interacts with objects that have narrative cues.
PRISOM (2013) uses Unity to reflect on social surveillance
The Dead Tower (212) was a Flash work that used Mezangelle
<? echo [THE_SIGNIFIER] ?> (2002) Reviewed in I love E-Poetry April 10, 2012
_the data][h!][bleeding texts_ (2001)
internal damage report and Fleshis.tics in Cauldron & Net, Volume 2 (1999) Reviewed in I love E-Poetry October 14, 2012
datahbabee Vs Narrow][B][randing first appeared in frAme 5 from trAce. This work has been preserved in the Next


Exhibitions
Wollongong World Women Online, 1995
ISEA, 1997 Chicago USA
ARS Electronica, 1997
The Metropolitan Museum, Tokyo Japan 1999
SIGGRAPH, 1999 & 2000
_Under_Score_, The Brooklyn Academy of Music, USA 2001
+playengines+, Melbourne Australia 2003
p0es1s, Berlin Germany 2004
Arte Nuevo InteractivA, Yucatán Mexico 2005
Radical Software, Turin Italy, 2006
DIWO, the HTTP Gallery London, 2007
Y O U . O W N . M E. N O W . U N T I L . Y O U . F O R G E T . A B O U T . M E. Museum of Modern Art Ljubljana 2008
New Media Scotland, 2008
The Laguna Art Museum California and Alternator Gallery Canada, 2009
Federation Square Melbourne, 2010
Transmediale Berlin, 2011
[Por]TrAIts: #AI Characters + Their Microstories [Book 1]’ (2022). Featured in the Future of Text Symposium, London, September 28, 2022.
International Digital Media and Art Association’s  2022 Weird Media Exhibition, 2022 (Dayforth)


Awards
Marjorie Luesebrink Career Achievement Award (2018)
VIF Prize, Germany (2001)
Electronic Literature Organisation Fiction Award Finalist for "the data][h!][bleeding texts" (2001)
JavaArtist of the Year, Austria (2001)
Newcastle Digital Poetry Prize, Australia (2002)
Site Specific Index Page Competition, Italy (2006)
Burton Wonderland Gallery Winner - judged by Tim Burton, Australia (2010)
Transmediale Vilèm Flusser Award Nominee, Germany  (2011)
Western Australian Premier's Book Awards Finalist: “Digital Narrative” Category for “#PRISOM” (2014)
BBC Writersroom/The Space Digital Theatre Competition Finalist (2014)
Thiel Grant Award for Online Writing Finalist (2015)
Shortlisted in the “Games Development” Category of the MCV Pacific Women In Games List, which profiles the:  “…most influential women across all facets of the Australian and New Zealand Games Industries.” (2015)
Tumblr International Prize (2015)
The Space's “Open Call” Commission for “Pluto” (2015)
Queensland Literary Awards: QUT Digital Literature Award for "V[R]ignettes" (2019)
Woollahra Digital Literary Awards  Readers’ Choice Award: Mez Breeze, Perpetual Nomads (2020)


Publications
Human Readable Messages_[Mezangelle 2003–2011] (2012).


See also

List of electronic literature authors, critics, and works
Digital poetry
E-book#History
Electronic literature
Hypertext fiction
Interactive fiction
Literatronica
Virtual reality
Digital art
Artificial intelligence art


References


Further reading
Evans, Sally (2011). "'The Anti-Logos Weapon': Excesses of Meaning and Subjectivity in Mezangelle Poetry". Cordite 36.
Hayles, N. Katherine (2002). "Deeper into the Machine: Learning to Speak Digital." Computers and Composition 19.
Memmott, Talan (2001) "E_RUPTURE://Codework"."Serration in Electronic Literature." American Book Review 22(6).
Raley, Rita (2002) "Interferences: [Net.Writing] and the Practice of Codework." Electronic Book Review.
Sondheim, Alan (2001). "Introduction: Codeworks." American Book Review 22(6).

Michell is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Anthony Michell (1870–1959), Australian mechanical engineer
Bert S. Michell (c.1882–1938), American horse racing trainer
Charles Collier Michell (1793–1851), British soldier and South African public servant
Chris Michell (born 1951), English flautist and composer
Edith Michell (1872–1951), English chess master
Edward Michell (1843–1926), English rower and barrister
Edward Michell (cricketer) (1853–1900), English batsman
Frederick Thomas Michell (1788–1873) Royal Navy admiral and mayor of Totnes
Helena Michell (born 1963), Australian actress
Howard Michell (1913–2012), Australian wool merchant, industrialist and philanthropist
John Michell (disambiguation)
John Michell (1724–1793), English natural philosopher and geologist
John Michell (writer) (1933–2009), English author on esotericism
John Henry Michell (1863–1940), Australian mathematician
Keith Michell (1928–2015), Australian actor
Matthew Michell (1705–1752), English politician
Nicholas Michell (1807–1880), Cornish writer
Reginald Pryce Michell (1873–1938), English chess master
Richard Rooke Michell (1810–1872), Cornish mining proprietor
Robert Michell (disambiguation), several people
Robert Michell (MP for Norwich) (died 1563), English politician
Robert Michell (MP for Petersfield) (1653–1729), English politician
Robert Michell (diplomat) (1876–1956), British minister to Bolivia and Uruguay and ambassador to Chile
Robert Williams Michell (1863–1916), British surgeon
Roger Michell (1956–2021), English theatre, television and film director
Tony Michell (born 1947), British businessman, entrepreneur, and pioneer for Korean development
Sampson Michell (1755–1809) British admiral of Portuguese navy, father of Charles and Frederick
Tris Vonna Michell (born 1982), British artist
William Michell (1796–1872), British physician and Member of Parliament


See also
All pages with titles containing Michell
Michell solution, a general solution to the elasticity equations in polar coordinates
Michell turbine, a water turbine

Microserica mutabilis is a species of beetle of the family Scarabaeidae. It is found in Indonesia (Java).


Description
Adults reach a length of about 3.5 mm. They have a shortly rounded, dull, black (although the head is somewhat greenish), faintly opalescent body. They are silky-glossy underneath. The pronotum is almost straight laterally, not projecting anteriorly. The elytra are irregularly punctate in the striae, with the intervals only slightly raised, but still clearly visible.


References

In archaeology, middle-range theory refers to theories linking human behaviour and natural processes to physical remains in the archaeological record. It allows archaeologists to make inferences in the other direction: from archaeological finds in the present to behaviours in the past. Middle range theories are derived from ethnoarchaeology and experimental research in combination with the study of taphonomic processes.


Background and application
The term was borrowed from the middle-range theory in sociology by Lewis Binford. He conducted ethnographic fieldwork amongst modern hunter-gatherer peoples such as the Nunamiut, the Navajo, and Aboriginal Australians in order to understand the pattern of waste their activities generated. He then used this data to infer the behaviour of Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers from the waste they left in the archaeological record.
Binford and many of his contemporaries viewed the construction of middle-range theories as a fundamental first step in understanding how people in the past behaved. However, middle-range research has since been criticized as logically flawed. Its critics argued that it rested on the unjustified assumption that there is a uniform link between behaviour and physical remains that holds true throughout human history. Its conclusions were argued to be untestable because their application was founded on a tautology: evidence from contemporary peoples (e.g. modern hunter-gatherers) was asserted to be applicable to people in the past (e.g. Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers) because they behaved in a similar way, but that same evidence was used to reconstruct the behaviour of the past people.


Middle-range theory
The middle-range theory in archaeology is narrowly conceived in current conception and negated in use. Theory building began to gain traction in the late 1970s in the time of New Archaeology and took several years to be a topic of critical interest. The concept is often misunderstood because of the multiplicity of the middle-range theory in another scholarly discipline – sociology. It is suggested in this approach that scientific knowledge becomes tied with emerging research studies and in turn into a middle-range abstraction.
Binford's structure for middle-range theory consists of four components: 1) documentation of causal relations between relevant dynamics and observable statics; 2) recognition of signature patterns in static remains; 3) inference of past dynamics from observation of signature patterns in archaeological record; and, 4) evaluation of these inferences.
In archaeology, Binford's method states that a strong relation to natural science will withstand close evaluation in that the theories and evidence should tie together. The connection between the history of the past and the material remains recovered in the present can be regimented to present the best inference. It's the explanatory element of archaeology though many critique it was being too arbitrary. The validity of the theories are often in question and because archaeology is not an exact science, the theories can not be tested rigorously to prove otherwise. The falls middle-range theory are on par with archaeology and anthropology as a whole because only small segments of people and material can be studied to produce an accurate depiction of past life. A general, global scope isn't possible.


References


Footnotes


Bibliography


Further reading

The midgut is the portion of the human embryo from which almost all of the small intestine and approximately half of the large intestine develop. After it bends around the superior mesenteric artery, it is called the "midgut loop". It comprises the portion of the alimentary canal from the end of the foregut at the opening of the bile duct to the hindgut, about two-thirds of the way through the transverse colon. In addition to representing an important distinction in embryologic development, the tissues derived from the midgut additionally have distinct vascular supply and innervation patterns in the adult gastrointestinal system.


In the embryo

During standard human embryonic development, the midgut undergoes a process known as physiological herniation around week 6, when rapid growth forces the midgut to temporarily exit the abdominal cavity and reside in the extra-abdominal umbilical cord. At this stage, the midgut begins its initial counterclockwise rotation around the axis of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). This rotation positions the cranial limb (destined to form parts of the small intestine) to the right and the caudal limb (which will give rise to parts of the colon) to the left.
Between weeks 10 and 12, the midgut retracts back into the abdominal cavity (leaving the umbilicus), undergoing an additional counterclockwise rotation, culminating in a total rotation of 270 degrees. This repositioning aligns the intestinal segments in their proper anatomical locations—for instance, placing the duodenojejunal junction in the left upper quadrant and the cecum in the right lower quadrant. Concurrently, the mesentery that supports the intestines becomes fixed to the posterior abdominal wall, ensuring proper stability and vascular supply; any disruptions in this intricate rotation and fixation process can lead to malrotation or other congenital anomalies.


In the adult


Organs in the adult midgut
Duodenum (distal half of 2nd part, 3rd and 4th parts)
Jejunum
Ileum
Cecum
Appendix
Ascending colon
Hepatic flexure of colon
Transverse colon (proximal two-thirds)


Vascular, lymphatics and innervation
Arterial supply to the midgut is from the superior mesenteric artery, an unpaired branch of the aorta. Venous drainage is to the portal venous system. Lymph from the midgut drains to prevertebral superior mesenteric nodes located at the origin of the superior mesenteric artery from the aorta. Portal drainage carries all non-lipid nutrients from digestion to the liver for processing and detoxification, while lymphatic drainage carries fatty chyle to the cisterna chyli. Parasympathetic innervation of the midgut is from the superior mesenteric plexus, while sympathetic innervation is from the lesser splanchnic nerve.


Clinical significance
Malrotation of the midgut during development can lead to volvulus.
Pain in the midgut is referred to the region around the belly button
As stated, in development a loop of midgut herniates outside of the abdominal cavity into the umbilical cord. If this persists after birth it is called an omphalocele. In omphalocele, there is a defect in the development of the anterior abdominal wall.


See also
Foregut
Hindgut


References


External links
digest-020—Embryo Images at University of North Carolina
radio/450 at eMedicine – "Midgut Volvulus"
00494 at CHORUS
Umich.edu – development

The Mieming Plateau (German: Mieminger Plateau) is a mountain terrace between 850 and 1000 metres high above the Upper Inn valley in the Austrian state of Tyrol at the southern foot of the  Mieming Chain. It lies in the municipalities of Wildermieming, Mieming, Obsteig and Mötz.
The low mountain terrace is composed of ground moraines and gravels, probably from the Würm glaciation. In the south the terrace is bounded by the so-called Achberg range (Achbergzug), a chain of mountains made of main dolomite, the other side of which is the Inn valley.
The plateau is about 14 kilometres long and up to 4 kilometres wide. Except near Telfs and Mötz it drops steeply 200 metres down to the Inn valley and ends in the west at the Holzleiten Saddle, where the road continues to  the Gurgltal and the Fern Pass section. From Telfs and Mötz there are transit routes that have probably been used since Roman times (Via Claudia Augusta), as evinced by an undated milestone near Holzleiten, that run across the plateau to the Fern Pass and on towards Augsburg.
The region is characterised by its small-scale division into fields of pasture and crops that alternate with larch meadows and open forest. 
A network of walking paths and cycleways, and in winter cross-country skiing routes, criss-crosses the plateau, making it a popular recreation area.
The fictitious village of Sonnenstein in the TV series Bergdoktor ("Mountain Doctor") is set on the plateau.


External links
Sonnenplateau Mieming & Tirol Mitte Tourist Association Innsbruck and its holiday villages, official website
Mieming Plateau private website
Mieming Plateau Protected Area,  Tyrol

The Miles and Misra Method (or surface viable count) is a technique used in Microbiology to determine the number of colony forming units in a bacterial suspension or homogenate. 
The technique was first described in 1938 by Miles, Misra and Irwin who at the time were working at the LSHTM. The Miles and Misra method has been shown to be precise.
Materials

A calibrated dropping pipette, or automatic pipette, delivering drops of 20μl.
Petri dishes containing nutrient agar or other appropriate medium.
Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) or other appropriate diluent.
Bacterial suspension or homogenate.
Method

The inoculum / suspension is serially diluted by adding 1x of suspension to 9x of diluent. When the quantity of bacteria is unknown, dilutions should be made to at least 10−8.
Three plates are needed for each dilution series, for statistical reasons an average of at least 3 counts are needed.
The surface of the plates need to be sufficiently dry to allow a 20μl drop to be absorbed in 15–20 minutes.
Plates are divided into equal sectors (it is possible to use up to 8 per plate). The sectors are labelled with the dilutions.
In each sector, 1 x 20 μl of the appropriate dilution is dropped onto the surface of the agar and the drop allowed to spread naturally. In the original description of the method a drop from a height of 2.5 cm spread over an area of 1.5-2.0 cm. It is important to avoid touching the surface of the agar with the pipette.
The plates are left upright on the bench to dry before inversion and incubation at 37 °C for 18 – 24 hours (or appropriate incubation conditions considering the organism and agar used).
Each sector is observed for growth, high concentrations will give a confluent growth over the area of the drop, or a large number of small/merged colonies. Colonies are counted in the sector where the highest number of full-size discrete colonies can be seen (usually sectors containing between 2-20 colonies are counted).
The following equation is used to calculate the number of colony forming units (CFU) per ml from the original aliquot / sample:
CFU per ml = (Average number of colonies for a dilution / 0.02) x dilution factor.
Advantages

Faster than other methods.
Produce less bacterial contamination of the working surface.


See also
Colony-forming unit


References

Milorad Popović Šapčanin (Serbian: Милорад Поповић Шапчанин; 7 July 1841 — 28 February 1895) was a Serbian poet, writer, dramatist, pedagogue and educational reformer who exemplified Realism in his works. 


Biography
Editor is a member of the "Domacica" Magazine (1885). An indefatigable cultural, educational, and public figure. A poet, storyteller, novelist, travel writer, playwright, and textbook writer. He wrote several plays that were performed on the Belgrade stage. He published over 20 books, including "Poems" (1863), "Short Stories" I, II, and III (1877/1879), and "Legacy" (1893). He released the publication "Whispers and Whirlwinds," in which he delved into our epic and lyrical poetry. Numerous smaller works were featured in publications such as Danica, Javor, Vila, Otadzbina, Strazilovo, and others.
Popović Šapčanin was also artistic director of the National Theatre in Belgrade (1877 and 1880-1893), a member of the Serbian Learned Society and Serbian Royal Academy.
He was married to Milka, the sister of Laza Lazarevic.
He died in Belgrade on February 26 (February 14 according to the Julian calendar) 1895.


Selected works
Pesme, Štamparija Nikole Stefanovića, Belgrade, 1863.
Pesme, Državna štamparija, Belgrade, 1866.
Pripovetke, Štamparija braće Jovanovića, Pančevo, 1877.
Hasan-aga, Izdanje knjižare Velimira Valožića, Belgrade, 1879.
Pripovetke, Pančevo, 1879.
S Drine na Nišavu, Državna štamparija, Belgrade, 1879.
Nevesta Ljutice Bogdana, Belgrade, 1880.
Žubori i vihori, Kraljevsko-srpska državna štamparija, Belgrade, 1883.
Miloš u Latinima, slika u jednom činu, izdanje Srpske knjižare i Štamparije braće M. Popovića, Novi Sad, 1886.
Monah, Srpska štamparijadr Svetozara Miletića, Novi Sad, 1887.
Pripovetke, Štamparija Srpske knjižare braće M. Popovića, Novi Sad, 1887.
Sanjalo, Izdanje Srpske knjižare i štamparije braće M. Popovića, Novi Sad, 1888.
Zadužbina, Izdanje i štampa A. Pajevića, Novi Sad, 1893.
Poslednje pripovetke, Štamparsko-umetnički zavod Pehera i Kisića, Mostar, 1902.
Celokupna dela Milorada P. Šapčanina I-V, Narodna prosveta, Belgrade, 1932.


References


Sources
Jovan Skerlić: Istorija nove srpske književnosti (Belgrade, 1921), pages 334-338


External links
Works by or about Milorad Popović Šapčanin at the Internet Archive
Biography on the website of SANU

In the Catholic Church, the term minister is used with various meanings. Most commonly, the word refers to a person, either lay or ordained, who is commissioned to perform some act on behalf of the Catholic Church. It is not a particular office or rank of clergy, as is the case in some other Christian organisations; rather, minister may be used as a collective term for vocational or professional pastoral leaders including clergy (bishops, deacons, priests) and non-clergy (theologians and lay ecclesial ministers). It is also used in reference to the canonical and liturgical administration of sacraments, as part of some offices, and with reference to the exercise of the lay apostolate.


Lay ministers
The Catholic Church calls people to the responsible stewardship of their time and talent in support of the Catholic Church. This often takes the form of volunteering for a specific lay ministry, most of which are liturgical, catechetical, or involved in pastoral care and social justice.
Liturgical lay ministries include lectors (ministers of the Word) who proclaim scriptural (the Bible) passages during the Liturgy of the Word, altar servers and acolytes who assist the presider at the altar, cantors and music ministers who lead the singing, extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion who serve during Mass or who take Holy Communion to the sick and homebound, and ushers or ministers of hospitality who direct the seating and procession of the assembly.
Catechetical lay ministries include catechists (Sunday school teachers and teachers at Catholic schools), dismissal leaders (ministers who lead RCIA catechumens on Sundays), retreat leaders, youth group leaders, and Scout religious emblems counselors.


Ecclesial ministers
Some persons within the church receive formation, usually including graduate studies in theology or divinity, and then exercising some leadership role in the community. In common usage, when someone refers to a "minister of the church" they are referring to any one of these "professional" ministers.
The Catholic Church identifies five ecclesial vocations, three of which are ordained. Theologians and lay ecclesial ministers are not necessarily ordained, while bishops, presbyters, and deacons are ordained. While only the latter are considered clergy by the Catholic Church, all are considered ministers in the professional and vocational sense.


Ministers of the sacraments
The other kind of minister in Catholic parlance is a person who administers a sacrament, meaning that he or she is a conduit of sacramental grace. This is not an office or position but instead a function that different kinds of people may perform, depending on the sacrament. There are two kinds of ministers in this sense. The ordinary minister of a sacrament, who is the standard or normal minister of that sacrament, has the spiritual power to administer it (i.e., the person's sacrament is valid), but not necessarily the canonical authority to administer it (i.e., a licit sacrament). Thus, a bishop who consecrates another bishop without pontifical mandate exercises illicitly the spiritual power to consecrate him. While bishops, priests and deacons are ordinary ministers of Holy Communion, only someone who has been validly ordained as a priest is a minister of the Eucharist. If a priest is, for some reason, debarred and yet celebrates the Eucharist, he does so illicitly (i.e. against canon law), but the Eucharist is still valid. However, in the case of the sacrament of Reconciliation (the Sacrament of Penance), although the priest is the minister, the only minister, since there are no extraordinary ministers of this sacrament, he must have been granted by the law itself or by a competent authority the faculty to celebrate this sacrament validly for the person to whom he imparts absolution.
An extraordinary minister of a sacrament is someone, other than an ordinary minister, officially authorized to administer a sacrament by the law itself (as an instituted acolyte is an extraordinary minister of Holy Communion) or by being deputed for this purpose.
Below is a table outlining each sacrament, its ordinary ministers, and its extraordinary ministers (if any), with stipulations regarding its exercise by extraordinary ministers in parentheses.


Instituted ministries
The offices of lector (reader) and acolyte were previously minor orders; with Ministeria quaedam (1972; taking effect on 1 January 1973), Pope Paul VI abolished minor orders and the subdiaconate, creating "instituted ministries" in their stead. Since 2021, in the Latin Church, both men and women can become instituted lectors and acolytes, and catechist has been turned into an instituted ministry and is available for both sexes.


Instituted lector and acolyte
While the approved English translations of the liturgical books of the Catholic Church's Roman Rite use the terms "instituted acolytes" and "instituted lectors" some translations refer to them as "installed". For example, the translation on the Vatican's website of the 2019 motu proprio Aperuit illis has "Bishops could celebrate the Rite of Installation of Lectors or a similar commissioning of readers".
In 1972, an official part of the Pontificale Romanum containing a liturgical ceremony for the installation of instituted lectors and instituted acolytes, was published.
The 1984 liturgical book Ceremonial of Bishops, says that in ceremonies where are bishop presides it is fitting that instituted acolytes and instituted lectors carry out their functions – rather than by those who have not been instituted. The 2004 Congregation for Bishops guideline Apostolorum Successores, n. 113, says: "The bishop should promote the ministries of lector and acolyte, which may be conferred upon male laypersons".
A role of the instituted lector is to proclaim the readings (except the Gospel) in liturgical celebrations. The instituted lector should do this even if ministers of higher rank are present. Other lay people do these readings at Mass in "the absence of an instituted lector".
In January 2021, with the motu proprio Spiritus Domini, Pope Francis changed the canon law of the Latin Church so that both men and women could become instituted lectors and acolytes. Previously, only men were allowed to be instituted in those ministries.


Instituted catechist
In May 2021, Pope Francis created the instituted ministry of lay catechist with the motu proprio Antiquum ministerium. In December 2021, the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments published a liturgical rite for the installation of instituted lay catechists.
On 23 January 2022, Pope Francis installed for the first time women as instituted lectors and catechists. On this day, Pope Francis held a ceremony during which he installed six women as instituted lectors, and three women as instituted catechists, along with some men.


See also
Christianity in the 1st century#Ministry and eschatological expectations


References


Further reading
"Letter to the Presidents of the Episcopal Conferences on the Rite of Institution of Catechists (3 December 2021)". www.vatican.va. Retrieved 2023-06-08. (press release version)

Mireya Baltra Moreno (25 February 1932 – 17 April 2022) was a Chilean sociologist, journalist, and politician of the Communist Party of Chile. She was a councillor (1963–1969) and a deputy (1969–1973) for Santiago, and served as Minister of Labour and Social Welfare in Salvador Allende's government.


Early life
Baltra was the daughter of José Baltra Baltra and María Moreno Cabezas, newsvendors in the centre of Santiago. Her father was a member of the Radical Party.
Baltra attended school at the Liceo Manuel de Salas and the Liceo N° 5 de Niñas. From childhood onward she helped her parents at their news kiosk in central Santiago. In 1957 she set up as a newsvendor on her own account, with another kiosk which she described as her “own viewpoint for social observation”.
She also worked as a reporter for Vea magazine from 1948 to 1950, and as a columnist for the newspaper El Siglo from 1960 to 1964, her first article being "La mujer como fuerza política" ("Women as a political force"). She also wrote for El Espectador and Las Noticias de Última Hora.
As a newsvendor she joined the journalists' union, and was elected head of the women's section and promoted to the National Federation of Journalists. Then in 1962 she joined the leadership of the Workers' United Center of Chile (CUT).


Political career

In 1963 Baltra was elected to the Santiago council, and was re-elected in 1967. In 1969 she was elected deputy for the 1st district of Santiago.
 In June 1972 she resigned her position as deputy on being appointed by President Allende as Minister of Labour and Social Welfare, a post she held until 2 November. In the March 1973 elections she was re-elected as deputy, this time for the 4th district, and held this position until the military coup on 11 September of that year.


Asylum and exile
Within a few days of the coup, the newly established dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet issued decrees under which Baltra, together with other prominent women in the Popular Unity government, were ordered to report to the Defence Ministry under threats of “facing the consequences” if they refused. The leadership of the Communist Party decided to seek asylum in the Dutch embassy. Together with others including Gladys Marín, secretary-general of the Communist Youth of Chile, senator Julieta Campusano, and Orlando Millas, Minister of Finance in Allende's government, they remained in asylum at the embassy for nine months.
In 1974 she went into exile, first in the Netherlands and later in Czechoslovakia. In Prague she became secretary-general of the international trade union body formed to express solidarity with Chilean workers. After nine years she travelled to Cuba and became executive secretary of the Continental Women's Front against the coup, working with Vilma Espín, president of the Cuban Women's Federation.


Return to Chile

In 1987 Baltra and Julieta Campusano re-entered Chile clandestinely, crossing the Andes from Argentina on horseback, accompanied by drovers and Argentine communist leaders. She had previously tried to enter Chile with other exiles: two attempts in planes, which were turned back to Argentina; and also through the Cuevas tunnel between Argentina and Chile, when twenty-one Chilean exiles were arrested, beaten and sent back to Argentina by agents of the CNI and the Carabineros de Chile.
Now on arrival in Chile, Baltra and Campusano presented themselves at the court of justice with the lawyers Enrique Krauss and Jaime Castillo Velasco, who claimed habeas corpus for the women. The military regime sent them away: Campusano to Camiña in the north of the country, and Baltra to Aysén in the south.
She returned to Santiago and joined the struggle against the military dictatorship. She was arrested after a secret press conference, and given a prison sentence under state security laws and for illicit association.
In the 1990s, still with the support of the Communist Party, she tried to return to parliament in the elections for deputy in 1993 and senator in 1997; but was defeated in both contests. She was a member of the editorial board of Crónica digital: información para cada día (Digital daily news), contributing articles on political topics and historical subjects.


Death
Baltra died on 17 April 2022 in Santiago, aged 90.


References


External links

Mister Venezuela 1996 was the 1st edition of the Mister Venezuela competition, held on July 17, 1996, at the Estudio 1 de Venevisión in Caracas, Venezuela.
At the end of the event, Carla Steinkopf, Miss Venezuela International 1995 and Pilín León, Miss World 1981, titled José Gregorio Faría of Zulia as Mister Venezuela 1996.
The 1st runner-up position went to Johnny Essig of Distrito Federal.


Results
Color key


International Male Model Venezuela 1999


Pageant


Selection committee


Final telecast
Sonia Roffé – Miss Venezuela Organization dermatologist
Carla Steinkopf – Miss International Venezuela 1995 and Top 15 in Miss International 1996
Carmen Montoya – Eurobuilding Hotel public relations and advertising manager
Pilín León – 1st Runner-Up in Miss Venezuela 1981 and Miss World 1981
Mónica Lei – Lawyer, Miss World Venezuela 1993 and 4th Runner-Up in Miss World 1993
Irene Ferreria – Miss World Venezuela 1994 and 2nd Runner-Up in Miss World 1994
Minorka Mercado – Miss Venezuela 1993 and 2nd Runner-Up in Miss Universe 1994
Luisa Guardia-Machado – Caracas high society lady
Elizabeth Otaola de Rotundo – Caracas high society lady
Luna Sultán Aserrath – Caracas high society lady


Contestants
20 contestants competed for the title.

Notes
Johnny Essig (#4), Eduardo Quintana (#2), Rodolfo Rendwick (#18) and Pablo Martin (#19) became actors. Winston Vallenilla (#6), also an actor entered later into politics.


Notes


References

The Mitsubishi Savrin is a compact MPV produced and sold in Taiwan by China Motor Corporation and Japanese automaker Mitsubishi Motors. The first generation was a locally assembled rebadged Chariot Grandis, while the second generation, introduced in June 2004, is actually a heavily revised facelift of the same Chariot Grandis platform.


First generation (2001–2004)

The first generation Mitsubishi Savrin in Taiwan was a locally assembled badge-engineered Chariot Grandis produced and sold by China Motor Corporation. Due to the agreement with Soueast Motors of mainland China, the same version of the rebadged Mitsubishi Chariot Grandis was rebadged as the Soueast Sovereign in mainland China.


Second generation (2004–2014)

The second generation Mitsubishi Savrin debuted in 2004 featuring redesigned front and rear fascia. The second generation Mitsubishi Savrin was sold in Taiwan only, and received another facelift in 2009 with a new grille, new tail lamps, and a redesigned rear bumper.


Annual production and sales


References


External links

Mitsubishi Savrin, CMC website
Mitsubishi Savrin specifications, CMC website

Mochdre () is a small village in the community of Mochdre with Penstrowed, in Montgomeryshire, Powys, Wales.


Geography
About 3 miles (4.8 km) southwest of Newtown, it is near the River Severn. Its tributary, Mochdre Brook runs through the village in a narrow steep-sided valley.


Name
The name means "pigs settlement", from moch, meaning pigs, and tre for settlement or town. It is possible that the name refers to Mochdre in the Fourth Branch of the Mabinogi, the tale of Math, son of Mathonwy, where Gwydion takes the pigs of Pryderi, staying overnight between the nearby commote of Ceri and Arwystli.


History

In 1872 it was a parish in the Newtown district called Moughtrey or Mochtref, with Eskirgilog and Moughtreyllan townships. At that time, there were 95 houses, a population of 526, and covered an area of 5,025 acres (2,034 ha).
The church, in the Diocese of St Asaph in the late 19th century, was an ancient church in poor shape as of 1859. With a roof dating from the 15th century, the rest of the Church of All Saints was rebuilt in 1867. All Saints is a parish of the Mission Area of Cedewain, Church in Wales.
Lake Mochdre, a former reservoir, later a fish farm, now a fishing venue, was created by damming a tributary stream.


Governance
Since the May 1999 local government elections the community has been covered by the electoral ward of Llandinam, which elects a county councillor to Powys County Council.


References

Mohammad Hosseini (Persian: سید محمد حسینی; born 22 June 1979) is a retired Iranian football player who played in the Persian Gulf Pro League and Azadegan League.


Club career

Assist Goals


National Team Career
He made his debut for Iran national football team in a friendly versus Armenia national football team on August 11, 2010.


Achievements
Runner-up: Hazfi Cup in 2005 with F.C. Aboomoslem.


References

[1]
[2]

Monopoly Capital: An Essay on the American Economic and Social Order is a 1966 book by the Marxian economists Paul Sweezy and Paul A. Baran. It was published by Monthly Review Press. It made a major contribution to Marxian theory by shifting attention from the assumption of a competitive economy to the monopolistic economy associated with the giant corporations that dominate the modern accumulation process. Their work played a leading role in the intellectual development of the New Left in the 1960s and 1970s. As a review in the American Economic Review stated, it represented "the first serious attempt to extend Marx’s model of competitive capitalism to the new conditions of monopoly capitalism."  It attracted renewed attention following the Great Recession.


Argument
Big business can maintain setting prices at high levels while still competing to cut costs, advertise, and market their products. The actual and potential economic surplus generated exceeds the existing outlets for investment and capitalist consumption. Private accumulation therefore requires the support of government spending geared primarily towards imperialistic and militaristic government tendencies, which is the easiest and surest way to utilize surplus productive capacity. Other forms of absorbing the surplus include expansion of the sales effort and the growth of finance, insurance, and real estate.


The economic surplus
One of the key contributions of Monopoly Capital is its application of the concept of economic surplus. The economic surplus is most simply the difference between “what a society produces and the costs of producing it. The size of the surplus is an index of productivity and wealth, of how much freedom a society has to accomplish whatever goals it may set for itself. The composition of the surplus shows how it uses that freedom: how much it invests in expanding its productive capacity, how much it consumes in various forms, how much it wastes and in what ways.”  
Although some scholars viewed the introduction of this concept as a break with the Marxist approach to value, later publications by Baran and Sweezy, as well as other authors, have continued to establish the importance of this innovation, its consistency with Marx's labor concept of value, and supplementary relation to Marx's category of surplus value. Baran and Sweezy argue that under the oligopolistic conditions of modern economies—dominated by big business—the surplus tends to rise. The vast extent of this increasing actual and potential surplus is visible in the underutilization of productive capacity, the level of unemployment, the waste embodied in the sales effort, and military spending. This is because monopoly/oligopoly conditions result in both insufficient opportunities for profitable reinvestment of the surplus (which shows up as excess capacity and unemployment) and forms of non-price competition involve large amounts of unproductive labor (e.g. in the sales effort and product differentiation). The overall result is a tendency toward economic stagnation and increased unproductive expenditures as a response.


Problems of surplus absorption and waste
Baran and Sweezy highlighted five aspects of the surplus absorption problem. First, that capitalist class luxury consumption could not rise as fast as the available surplus and monopoly conditions limited outlets for productive investment. Second, spending on the sales effort was an important outlet for surplus as large firms engaged in non-price forms of competition and sought to enlarge demand. However, such marketing expenditures (advertising, sales promotion, excessive model changes, etc.) do not provide any additional use-value and therefore may be treated as waste. Third, capitalist opposition to civilian spending as a threat to their class interests and class power limited the ability of such spending to provide effective demand. Fourth, military spending does not compete with capitalist interests in the same way as civilian spending and through imperialism serves to enhance those interests. Therefore, military spending is able to expand to a degree civilian spending is not, providing an important outlet for surplus absorption. Fifth, spending on finance can serve to absorb a portion of the surplus and boost the economy, at the expense of greater debt expansion and long-term instability.


The irrational qualities of monopoly capitalist society
In the book's concluding chapters Baran and Sweezy highlight the growing disparity between the productive potential of US society and the waste and misuse of that potential. They point to racial disparities and the social and cultural costs of the current structure of the political economic system where real basic needs for human development such as education and housing are not met while a belligerent militarism and cultural traits associated today with “consumerism” are cultivated with great effort in the interests of profit. They see the primary weaknesses of the system to be in the imperial realm, as countries in the periphery revolt against the domination of monopoly capital over their economies, a revolt that is increasingly mirrored in the resistance of peoples of color, making up a critical part of the working class, within the United States itself.


Monopoly capital and the Great Recession
With the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession of these years, followed by conditions of economic stagnation, some political economists have argued that Baran and Sweezy's analysis in Monopoly Capital is key to the theoretical and historical explanation of these events. This has led to an extension of theory to address what is called "monopoly-finance capital," the "internationalization of monopoly capital," the globalization of the reserve army of labor, and the growing monopolization of communications, most dramatically the Internet.


See also
History of economic thought


References


Further reading
Baran, Paul A. & Sweezy, Paul M. Monopoly Capital: An essay on the American economic and social order (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1966)
Nicholas Baran and John Bellamy Foster, eds., The Age of Monopoly Capital, The Selected Correspondence of Paul A. Baran and Paul M. Sweezy, 1949-1964 (Monthly Review Press, New York, 2017).
Paul Auerbach and Peter Skott, "Concentration, Competition and Distribution: A Critique of Theories of Monopoly Capital", International Review of Applied Economics, vol. 2 (1), 1988, pp. 42–61
Michael F. Bleaney, Underconsumption Theories: A History and Critical Analysis (New York: International Publishers, 1976), pp. 225–243
Braverman, Harry. Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974)
Joseph Choonara, "Marxist accounts of the current crisis", International Socialism, Issue 123, 24 June 2009
Peter Clecak, Radical Paradoxes: Dilemmas of the American Left, 1945-1970 (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), pp. 72–174
Keith Cowling, Monopoly Capitalism (London: Macmillan, 1982)
Ben Fine; Andy Murfin, Macroeconomics and Monopoly Capitalism (Brighton: Wheatsheaf Books, 1984)
Fusfeld, Daniel R. (1994) The Age of the Economist, pp. 151–2, HarperCollins, 7th Ed. ISBN 0-673-46805-4
Robert L. Heilbroner, "A Marxist America", New York Review of Books, 26 May 1966, pp. 22–4, reprinted in Robert L. Heilbroner, Between Capitalism and Socialism (New York: Random House, 1970), pp. 237–246
Robert R. Keller, "Monopoly Capital and the Great Depression: Testing Baran and Sweezy's Hypothesis", Review of Radical Political Economics, vol. 7 (4), December 1975, pp. 65–75
Michael C. Howard; John E. King, A History of Marxian Economics, Volume II: 1929-1990 (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1992), pp. 109–127, 313–316
Andrew Kliman, The Failure of Capitalist Production: Underlying Causes of the Great Recession (London: Pluto Press, 2012), pp. 151–180
Bill Lucarelli, Monopoly Capitalism in Crisis (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2004)
Bellod Redondo, J. F. (2008); "Monopolio e Irracionalidad: Microfundamentos de la Teoría Baran - Sweezy"; revista Principios - Estudios de Economía Política, pp 65 – 84, nº 10, Fundación Sistema, Madrid.
Michael Lebowitz, Following Marx (Boston: Brill, 2009)
Thomas E. Lambert; Edward Kwon, "Monopoly Capital and Capitalist Inefficiency", International Review of Applied Economics, vol. 29 (4), February 2015, pp. 533–552
Thomas E. Lambert, "Monopoly Capital and Entrepreneurism: Whither Small Business?", Cambridge Journal of Economics, March 2019
Thomas E. Lambert, "Monopoly Capital and Innovation: An Exploratory Assessment of R&D Effectiveness", International Review of Applied Economics, May 2019
Raymond Lubitz, "Monopoly capitalism and neo-Marxism", The Public Interest, Issue number 21, Fall 1970, pp. 167–178
Foster, John Bellamy; Magdoff, Fred. The Great Financial Crisis (Monthly Review Press, 2009)
McChesney, Robert W.; Foster, John Bellamy; Stole, Inger L.; & Holleman, Hannah. "The Sales Effort and Monopoly Capital", Monthly Review, April 2009
E.K. Hunt and Mark Lautzenheiser, History of Economic Thought: A Critical Perspective, third edition (Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2011) pp 530–32
Paul Mattick, Anti-Bolshevik Communism (Monmouth: Merlin Press, 1978), pp. 187–209
Foster, John Bellamy & McChesney, Robert W. The Endless Crisis: How Monopoly-Finance Capital Produces Stagnation and Upheaval from the USA to China (Monthly Review Press, 2012)
Robert W. McChesney, Digital Disconnect (New York: New Press, 2013)
Bob Milward, Globalisation? Internationalisation and Monopoly Capitalism: Historical Processes and Capitalist Dynamism (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2003)
Bruce Norton, "The Accumulation of Capital as Historical Essence: A Critique of the Theory of Monopoly Capitalism", Discussion Paper Series, Association for Economic and Social Analysis, Amherst, Mass., November 1983
Christian Pépin, "La stagnation à l'ère de la financiarisation et de la globalisation du capitalisme avancé: interprétation critique de l'école de la Monthly Review", Master's thesis, Université du Québec à Montréal, 2015
Luis A. Pérez-Feliciano, The American Political Economy and Monopoly Capital: A Reinterpretation (VDM Verlag Dr. Müller, 2009)
Luis A. Pérez-Feliciano, "The Myth of Monopoly Capital", International Journal of Arts and Commerce, Vol. 1, No. 7 (December 2012), pp. 143–158
Malcolm C. Sawyer, "Theories of Monopoly Capitalism", Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 2, No. 1 (March 1988), pp. 47–76
Anwar Shaikh, "An Introduction to the History of Crisis Theories" in U.S. Capitalism in Crisis (New York: U.R.P.E., 1978), pp. 219–241
Anwar Shaikh, Capitalism: Competition, Conflict, Crises (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016), pp. 353–7
Ron Stanfield, The Economic Surplus and Neo-Marxism (Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath & Co., 1973)
Fabian van Onzen 'Service Workers in the Era of Monopoly Capital' (Leiden, Brill, 2021)
Sam Williams, "The Monthly Review School", A Critique of Crisis Theory From a Marxist perspective blog, 28 February 2010
Erik Olin Wright, "Alternative Perspectives in Marxist Theory of Accumulation and Crisis", The Insurgent Sociologist, Fall 1975, reprinted in The Subtle Analysis of Capitalism, ed. Jesse Schwartz (Santa Monica: Goodyear Publishers, 1977)
Jonas Zoninsein, Monopoly Capital Theory: Hilferding and Twentieth-Century Capitalism (New York: Greenwood Press, 1990)

A monospaced font, also called a fixed-pitch, fixed-width, or non-proportional font, is a computer font whose letters and characters each occupy the same amount of horizontal space. This contrasts with variable-width fonts, where the letters and spacings have different widths.
Monospaced fonts are customary on typewriters and for typesetting computer code.
Monospaced fonts were widely used in early computers and computer terminals, which had limited graphical capabilities.  Hardware implementation was simplified by using a text mode where the screen layout was addressed as a regular grid of tiles, each of which could be set to display a character by indexing into the hardware's character map.  Some systems allowed colored text to be displayed by varying the foreground and background color for each tile.  Other effects included reverse video and blinking text.  Nevertheless, these early systems were typically limited to a single console font.
Even though computers can now display a wide variety of fonts, the majority of IDEs and software text editors employ a monospaced font as the default typeface. This increases the readability of source code, which is often heavily reliant on distinctions involving individual symbols, and makes differences between letters more unambiguous in situations like password entry boxes where typing mistakes are unacceptable.  Monospaced fonts are also used in terminal emulation and for laying out tabulated data in plain text documents. In technical manuals and resources for programming languages, a monospaced font is often used to distinguish code from natural-language text. Monospaced fonts are also used by disassembler output, causing the information to align in vertical columns.
Optical character recognition has better accuracy with monospaced fonts.  Examples are OCR-A and OCR-B.
The term modern is sometimes used as a synonym for monospace generic font family. The term modern can be used for a fixed-pitch generic font family name, which is used in OpenDocument format (ISO/IEC 26300:2006) and Rich Text Format.
Examples of monospaced fonts include Courier, Lucida Console, Menlo, Monaco, Consolas, Inconsolata, PragmataPro and Source Code Pro.


Use in art
Multiple art forms have developed within computers' and typewriters' monospaced typographic settings in which the nth character of every line align vertically with each other. (Such a group of characters is sometimes called a column.) A proportional and monospaced font's reproduction of an element of ANSI art, line drawing, is illustrated below.

The failure of a proportional font to reproduce the desired boxes above motivates monospaced fonts' use in the creation and viewing of ASCII and ANSI art. Some poetry composed monospaced on typewriters or computers also depends on the vertical alignment of character columns. E. E. Cummings' poetry is often set in monospaced type for this reason. Some classic video games (e.g. Rogue and NetHack) and those imitating their style (e.g. Dwarf Fortress) use a monospaced grid of characters to render their state for the player. Quiz Show (1976) is believed to be the first video game to use 8×8 monospaced "arcade font", which got widely adopted by computer games of the time.


Tabular figures
 

Many fonts that generally are not monospaced have numerals that are known as tabular figures. As tabular spacing makes all numbers with the same number of digits the same width, it is used for typesetting documents such as price lists, stock listings and sums in mathematics textbooks, all of which require columns of numbers to line up on top of each other for easier comparison. Tabular spacing is also a common feature of simple printing devices such as cash registers and date-stamps. Fonts intended for professional use in documents such as business reports may also make the bold numbers take up the same width as the numbers in regular style; the consistency between styles is called "duplexing".

The alternative to tabular spacing is proportional spacing, which places the numbers closely together, reducing empty space in a document, and is thought to allow the numbers to blend into the text more effectively. With modern fonts using the TrueType or OpenType formats, it is possible to include both proportional and tabular figures in the same font file, and choose between them using font options settings in applications such as word processors or web browsers.


Other uses
In biochemistry, monospaced fonts are preferred for displaying nucleic acid and protein sequences, as they ensure that the representation of every nucleotide or amino acid occupies the same amount of space. Alignment of the letters makes it easier to compare different sequences visually.
Both screenplays and stage play scripts frequently use monospaced fonts, to make it easier to judge the time a script will last for from the number of pages. The industry standard is 12 point Courier. A tradition holds that, on this format, one page of script will take one minute of screen or stage time.
Monospaced fonts are frequently used in tablature music for guitar and bass guitar. Each line in a tabulature represents a guitar string, which requires that chords played across multiple strings be tabbed in vertical sequence, a feat accomplished only with the predictability of fixed width.


See also
List of monospaced typefaces
Duospaced font
Mathematical Alphanumeric Symbols


Notes


References

Montgomeryite is a phosphate mineral with the chemical formula Ca4MgAl4(PO4)6(OH)4·12H2O. The mineral was discovered in Fairfield, Utah in a variscite nodule. Montgomeryite is a very rare mineral and can only be found in a few places in the world.


References

Mosaic Outdoor Clubs of America (often abbreviated MOCA or Mosaic) is an international non-profit network of Jewish outdoor clubs in the United States, Canada, and Israel.


History and Organization
The first Mosaic Club was founded in Colorado by Steve Harris Millmond in reaction to his perception that modern Judaism had lost touch with the outdoors and the environment. The name, "Mosaic", refers to Moses, the Biblical prophet and an "outdoor Jew". The initial group still exists as the Mosaic Outdoor Mountain Club; its first event, a hike in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado, was held in December 1988.
The international umbrella organization, Mosaic Outdoor Clubs of America, was founded in 1995, incorporated in May 1996, and obtained 501(c)(3) non-profit status in April 1997; Rick Dronsky was its first executive director, serving from 1996 until 2002. Mosaic Outdoor Clubs of American currently recognizes local chapters in three countries and is overseen by a volunteer board of directors that has traditionally been elected at Mosaic's annual international gathering. The umbrella organization is largely responsible for coordinating the annual gathering and assisting with the formation of new chapters. When its first board was elected in 1998, twelve chapters were recognized; as of 2007, this total now stands at over 20.
Local chapters host hikes, trail cleanups, and environmental education efforts, in addition to being a social and recreational outlet and a meeting venue for Jewish singles interested in the outdoors. The more active local affiliates count their membership in the hundreds, and host outdoor events every weekend or several times per month.
International gatherings of Mosaic members have been held annually since 1991, usually in the United States around the Labor Day weekend; the 2007 international event saw over 200 attendees.


References


External links
Official website
Mosaic International Event

The 9th constituency of Moselle is a French legislative constituency in the Moselle département.


Description
Moselle's 9th constituency consists of the city of Thionville close to the border with Luxembourg and the surrounding more rural areas.
The seat was held by Gaullist parties from 1988 until 2017. Following the suicide of Jean-Marie Demange in 2008, Anne Grommerch acquired it.


Historic Representation


Election results


2024


2022


2017


2012


Sources
Official results of French elections from 2002: "Résultats électoraux officiels en France" (in French).

NOAAS George B. Kelez (R 441), previously NOAAS George B. Kelez (CRS 41), was an American research vessel in commission in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) fleet from 1972 to 1980. Prior to her NOAA career, she operated under the United States Fish and Wildlife Service′s Bureau of Commercial Fisheries from 1962 to 1970 as US FWS George B. Kelez and the National Marine Fisheries Service from 1970 to 1972 as NOAAS George B. Kelez (CRS 41).
Before becoming a research vessel, the ship was the United States Army freight and supply vessel U.S. Army FS-400 from 1944 to 1950. On transfer to the Navy the vessel was classified as a "light cargo ship" for the United States Navy′s Military Sea Transportation Service as USNS AKL-30 (T-AKL-30) from 1950 to 1961.


Construction
The ship was built as a U.S. Army freight and supply vessel, Design 381 (officially Vessel, Supply, Diesel, Steel, 177') also called coastal cargo ships. The type was built by several shipbuilders during World War II with FS-400 being the last of a series of the design built by Ingalls Shipbuilding, Decatur, Alabama, in 1944. NOAA history, primarily concerned with the NOAA operation of the vessel, has design by Sturgeon Bay Shipbuilding and Drydock Company of Wisconsin with Nickum & Sons Consultants of Seattle, Washington but the designs were of U.S. Army origin according to other references.


Service history


U.S. Army and U.S. Navy
FS-400, was placed in service with the United States Army Transportation Corps during World War II  with a United States Coast Guard crew. The ship operated in the Central Pacific Area calling at ports such as Noumea, Guadalcanal, and, after the end of the war, Wake Island.
On 1 July 1950, she was transferred from the U.S. Army Transportation Corps to the United States Navy′s Military Sea Transportation Service, entering noncommissioned service in the U.S. Navy as USNS AKL-30 (T-AKL-30). She was stricken from the Naval Register in 1961 and declared excess property at Mare Island Naval Shipyard in Mare Island, California, during the summer of 1961.


U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service

In late 1961, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), an agency of the United States Department of the Interior, inspected AKL-30. The USFWS acquired her in 1962 for use as a fisheries research vessel, and in February 1962 towed her from Mare Island  to Seattle, Washington, where she underwent conversion into a fisheries research ship over the next four and a half months at a cost of approximately US$100,000. Her USFWS crew did most of the conversion work, purchasing and installing new equipment such as fishing equipment, oceanographic equipment, and specialized electrical and refrigeration systems and modifying the captain's and crew's quarters.
When her conversion was complete, the ship – now named US FWS George B. Kelez – was commissioned in a ceremony at Seattle on 20 July 1962 attended by Kelez's mother and brother. Kelez, a fisheries scientist who was the Assistant Fisheries Administrator for the Territory of Alaska, was one of five Fish and Wildlife Service employees who died on duty in the crash of a Grumman Goose amphibious aircraft in Alaska on 1 September 1954, and the ship carried a plaque – read aloud at the ceremony – that read:

United States Bureau of Commercial Fisheries Motor Ship George B. Kelez
To inspire those who man her and those who follow her course in the great international seas, this research ship is hereby dedicated to the honor of George B. Kelez, Fishery Research Biologist and Alaska Fishery Administrator of the U. S. Bureau of Fisheries and Fish and Wildlife Service from 1930 to 1954. This ship and her scientists will further the research ideals and objectives on the high seas and in Alaskan waters which motivated his entire career. Wherever this living ship goes, there goes also the spirit and faith of George B. Kelez, who dedicated his life to conservation of our fishery resources. We are proud of the name, proud of the vessel and proud of the crew. May our Lord protect and guide you.

Signed by Samuel J. Hutchinson, Regional Director, 20 July 1962.
Assigned to the USFWS's Bureau of Commercial Fisheries (BCF), George B. Kelez gave the BCF a new capability to conduct oceanographic and open-ocean salmon studies during the winter; previously, the BCF had relied on chartered vessels for such studies, but they were too small for safe winter operations in the open ocean and were limited to spring and summer operations. George B. Kelez also provided the BCF with adequate on-board laboratory space and storage space for gear and spare parts for the first time.
George B. Kelez's first cruise for the BCF – a six-week shakedown cruise in the Gulf of Alaska and off the Aleutian Islands – began in late July 1962. During the cruise, she conducted experimental salmon gillnetting. During the 1960s, she made several salmon-fishing cruises in Bristol Bay and other waters off Alaska in support of the BCF's Biological Laboratory. During the mid-1960s, she also participated in several experiments designed to determine ocean current flows, using drift bottles in the subarctic Pacific Ocean and oceanographic data-gathering buoys equipped with radio transmitters released in the Pacific Ocean 300 nautical miles (560 km; 350 mi) off the coast of Washington. In early 1966, she took part in the first winter oceanographic measurement of the Alaskan Stream – a current related closely to the formation of the salmon fishing ground – in the western subarctic region of the North Pacific.


NOAA
On 3 October 1970, a major reorganization occurred which formed the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) under the United States Department of Commerce. As part of the reorganization, the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries was removed from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and placed under NOAA, and ships of the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries fleet joined those of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in forming the new NOAA fleet. At first, the major ships that were to constitute the new fleet reported to separate entities, with former Coast and Geodetic Survey ships subordinate to the National Ocean Survey (the Coast and Geodetic Survey's successor organization within NOAA), while former BCF ships like George B. Kelez reported to the BCF's successor within NOAA, the National Marine Fisheries Service. During 1972 and 1973, however, the ships of the National Ocean Survey and National Marine Fisheries Service, as well as those of the Environmental Research Laboratories, integrated to form a consolidated and unified NOAA fleet, operated by the National Ocean Survey's Office of Fleet Operations. George B. Kelez officially became part of the new NOAA fleet in 1972. As a NOAA ship, she at first was redesignated NOAAS George B. Kelez (CRS 41), later becoming NOAAS George B. Kelez (R 441).

Meanwhile, George B. Kelez continued her operations. In the summer of 1971, she conducted a cruise in the North Pacific to collect salmon and sea trout samples which were later analyzed in genetic and maturity studies. In the autumn of 1971, she made a 21-day cruise off Washington and British Columbia to sample ichthyoplankton and zooplankton populations and conduct tests in the field of fishing gear, including net systems, on-board larvae-holding facilities, a seawater chemical concentration autoanalyzer, and a method of using computers to process salinity and water temperature data. She made a 39-day cruise off Southeast Alaska in early 1972 in which she tagged 2,400 sablefish. In the spring of 1972, she cruised for 22 days near Kodiak, Alaska, examining oceanographic and environmental conditions and testing the operation of shipboard data acquisition devices. Also that spring, she made a cruise in Puget Sound and in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of Washington to determine the suitable structure, towing speeds, and trajectories for zooplankton sampling gear known as a bongo net, which consists of paired plankton nets mounted side-by-side that a vessel tows horizontally through the water. In the summer of 1972, she made a cruise in the Gulf of Alaska to study the distribution and abundance of Pacific salmon.
NOAA had limited funding during its first three years of existence between 1970 and 1972, forcing it to reduce ship operations and oceanographic studies. This led NOAA to decommission George B. Kelez near the end of 1972, and she never returned to fisheries research work. However, in March 1973 NOAA recommissioned her and loaned her to the United States Geological Survey for use in Southern California. In late 1974, NOAA moved her to a new home port, NOAA's Atlantic Marine Center at Norfolk, Virginia, and on 6 December 1974 opened bids for repair work to the ship.
With her repairs completed, George B. Kelez returned to service, focusing on oceanographic research. She spent the years from 1976 to 1980 primarily operating in connection with the Marine Ecosystems Analysis (MESA) New York Bight Project, which used benthic sampling to monitor and research the short-term ecological effects of ocean dumping. During this time, she was assigned to the support of NOAA's Environmental Research Laboratories from 1976 to 1977 and to the support of NOAA's Office of Marine Pollution Assessment from 1978 to 1979. In January 1980, 35 scientists from 13 countries taking part in an intergovernmental project to gather oceanographic data on the effects of common pollutants conducted open-ocean sampling aboard George B. Kelez in the North Atlantic Ocean off Bermuda. NOAA decommissioned her by the end of January 1980 and eventually put her up for sale.


Later career
In April 1982 the Seafarers Harry Lundeberg School of Seamanship of Brooklyn, New York, purchased the ship and renamed her MV Earl "Bull" Shepard. The school, which moved to Piney Point, Maryland, in 1991 and simultaneously renamed itself the Paul Hall Center for Maritime Training and Education, used her until February 1994, when it sold her to foreign buyers, who renamed her MV Croyance. She was renamed MV Rest Express in 1997, MV Mon Repos in 1998, and MV Monrepos Express. In 1999, she again was named MV Croyance. In 2005, Croyance was spotted tied up in a rusty condition at Moss Point, Mississippi, bearing a port of registry of San Lorenzo, Honduras. In 2006, the Omega Protein Corporation of Reedville, Virginia, acquired her, registered her in the United States, renovated her for use as a menhaden fishing vessel, and renamed her MV Smuggler's Point. As of 2016, Smuggler's Point remained in commercial service.


Footnotes


See also
NOAA ships and aircraft


References

Naangal (transl. We) is a 2025 Indian Tamil-language film written, directed, photographed and edited by Avinash Prakash and produced by GVS Raju under the banner of Kala Bhavashri Creations, starring Abdul Rafe, Mithun Vasudevan, Rithik Mohanraj, Nithin Dineshkumar, Prarthana Srikaanth, John E, Tanika Guruprasad, K Hariharan and others in pivotal roles. It was released in theatres on 18 April 2025.


Cast
Abdul Rafe
Mithun Vasudevan
Rithik Mohanraj
Nithin Dineshkumar
Prarthana Srikaanth
John E
Tanika Guruprasad
K Hariharan


Production
The film is produced by GVS Raju under the banner of Kala Bhavashri Creations, while the director of the film Avinash Prakash has also handled the cinematography and editing. The others as part of the technical team consists of Vrajbala J as the production designer, Ved Shanker Sugavanam as the music composer, Sujatha N as the lyricist, with Saindhavi lending her voice for a song in the film.


Music
The film has music composed by Ved Shanker Sugavanam.


Release


Premiere
Naangal was screened at several film festivals including, Rotterdam Film Festival, Mostra São Paulo International Film Festival, Jio MAMI Film Festival, and the Bengaluru International Film Festival.


Theatrical
Naangal released in theatres on 18 April 2025 by S Subbiah of SSI Productions.


Critical response
Ashwin S of Cinema Express gave 4/5 stars and wrote "In this era where identity crises are rampant and parents are forced to be extremely careful regarding every decision they take with their children, Naangal takes a step back in time to the 90s, to show how even the most fundamental aspects like words and actions towards a child can impact their lives to a significant extent." Abhinav Subramanian of The Times of India gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Naangal is undeniably a thoughtfully crafted film, anchored by a strong central performance and the natural, subtle work from the three young actors playing the sons, all contributing to its distinct mood. It offers an unflinching look at a difficult upbringing." Gopinath Rajendran of The Hindu wrote "Naangal takes you on a trip down memory lane to your childhood days without assuring you that all of those memories would be pleasant. It is a profoundly personal work from a filmmaker who, with the title, tells the world that this is who they are without letting this chapter of life define them."


References


External links
Naangal at IMDb

Nabil Bechaouch (1970 – 7 October 2020) was a Tunisian footballer.


Biography
Bechaouch played for the Tunisia from 1993 to 1995. He played three matches during the 1996 African Cup of Nations qualification. He died on 7 October 2020 of a heart attack.


Awards
Winner of the CAF Cup in 1998 with CS Sfaxien
Winner of the Tunisian Cup in 1993 with Olympique Béja
Winner of the Tunisian Super Cup in 1995 with Olympique Béja


References

Chang Tang Chang (née Tang Nanshan; Chinese: 唐南珊; pinyin: Táng Nánshān; born 1950), also known by her English name Nancy Chang, is a Taiwanese biochemist. She co-founded the biopharmaceutical company Tanox in 1986. She also developed the asthma drug Xolair. In June 2003, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Xolair, the first biotech product cleared for treating those with asthma related to allergies. Tanox was also active in the development of TNX-355, an antibody for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. In 2007, Tanox was sold to Genentech for $919 million.


Early life and education
Chang was born in Taiwan in 1950. Her mother was a surgeon and her father was a civil engineer; they were wealthy waishengren who migrated to Taiwan during the Great Retreat, shortly after marrying.
Chang studied chemistry and physics at Taipei First Girls' High School in Taipei. After graduation, she attended National Tsing Hua University, where one of her undergraduate teachers was Nobel Prize laureate Yuan T. Lee and one of her classmates was scientist Tse Wen Chang. Chang married Tse a few days before traveling to the United States, where both had received scholarships for graduate school: Chang at Brown University and Tse Wen at Harvard University. Chang also completed additional undergraduate studies at Brown University.
On the plane ride to the United States, Chang read James Watson’s book on the discovery of the double helix. This sparked her interest in biology, which she had not previously studied. Chang subsequently changed her academic focus to biology and transferred to Harvard University to study medical sciences at Harvard Medical School. The Changs were among the first international students at the Harvard Division of Medical Sciences, but Chang had to overcome an initially poor comprehension of English. She earned her Ph.D. in biological chemistry from Harvard Medical School in 1981.


Work
Her interest in interferon led her to approach  Sidney Pestka at Roche Pharmaceutical Company and be hired at Hoffman-La Roche. For a time, the Changs endured the difficulties of a commuter marriage: Chang lived and worked in Parsippany, NY; Tse Wen commuted to Pennsylvania each week to work at Centocor.  Eventually Chang joined Centocor as a bench-level diagnostician. Her heart was still in research, and she took part in Centocor's involvement in therapeutic research. She brought in several new projects, including HIV/AIDS research.  Nancy's team participated in a consortium, which sequenced the HIV genome structure. Chang was instrumental in developing the first diagnostic assay to detect HIV infection by employing a peptide segment of HIV as the solid-phase antigen in the immunoassay.  She was Director of Research at Centocor from 1982 to 1986.
In 1986, the Changs moved to Houston, TX.  Baylor College of Medicine in Houston offered Tse Wen a faculty position, and Chang was able to obtain a position as well.  She became Associate Professor of Virology at Baylor College of Medicine,  from 1986 to 1991.
Both Chang and Tse Wen suffered severely from allergies.  Tse Wen had an idea for treating allergies by blocking IgE (immunoglobulin E), and the Changs founded the biotechnology company Tanox. Tse Wen continued his preferred work as a professor, and Chang was president of the new company. In 1992, the Changs separated. Tse Wen returned to Taiwan in 1996 to teach, while remained as a board member of Tanox until the company was acquired by Genentech. Chang continued her work with Tanox, as CEO and president.
Tanox focused on addressing medical needs in the areas of allergy, asthma, inflammation, and diseases affecting the human immune system, developing an asthma drug that targeted the allergy-related basis of asthma, Xolair. 
Tanox's initial public offering in 2000 was the second largest IPO ever for a biotechnology company, raising $244 million. In June 2003, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Xolair, the first biotech product cleared for treating those with asthma related to allergies.  In 2007, Tanox was sold to Genentech for $919 million. Chang continued to be involved, as chairman of Tanox's board of directors.
Tanox was also active in the development of TNX-355, an antibody for the treatment of HIV/AIDS. Chang has said that she is passionate about AIDS because of her work as a young researcher in one of the first laboratories to confront the disease.
Chang Chang's published research includes over 35 papers on topics including monoclonal antibodies and HIV.  She has been awarded seven patents.
Chang has been on the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank in Houston, of BioHouston, of Project Hope, of Charles River Laboratories, and of the Board of Visitors of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, among others. Chang is an angel investor in health-care entrepreneurships and performs philanthropic work in community health-education projects. As part of Project Hope's China programs, she has had the responsibility of assessing annual progress in programs at Wuhan University School of Medicine, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, and educational programs and treatments for diabetes and HIV/AIDS. As of 2009,  Chang was the chairman and managing director of OrbiMed's Caduceus Asia partner fund and a member of Orbimed Advisors, the largest investment firm focused entirely on the healthcare sector. As of 2013, Chang Chang was president of Apex Enterprises.


Honors and awards
During her career,  Chang has received numerous academic, national and international awards for her leadership and contributions to the biopharmaceutical industry.
Chang Chang was inducted into the Texas Science Hall of Fame in 2001, for exemplary achievement in science.
In 2005, she was named a Most Respected Woman in Biotechnology (MedAd News, 2005), and also received the Global Business Achievement Hall of Fame Governor's Award from the Global Federation of Chinese Business Women in the Southern U.S.
In 2008 Chang was named to the Forbes Twenty-Five Notable Chinese Americans list.
In 2012, she became the first woman to receive the 14th annual Biotechnology Heritage Award, conferred by the Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) and the Chemical Heritage Foundation.
She is the recipient of several additional awards, such as the Association of Women in Computing: Top 20 Houston Women in Technology and Houston Entrepreneur of the Year.


References


External links
Chang Chang, Video, 15 min 35 sec, from Women in Chemistry, at the Science History Institute, Philadelphia, PA

Naval aircrewman (NAC) is an enlisted general rating of the U.S. Navy. Sailors in NAC ratings serve as aircraft systems operators or inflight system maintenance technicians aboard U.S. Navy fixed and rotary winged aircraft. They perform duties as varied as aerial gunners, rescue swimmers, radar and sonar operators, airborne mine countermeasures system operators, strategic communications systems specialists, loadmasters, repair technicians, and various other functions depending on the specific aircraft type in which they fly. The rating is divided into five subdivisions termed "service ratings". Those service ratings are: Naval Aircrewman Operator (AWO); Naval Aircrewman Helicopter (AWS); Naval Aircrewman Tactical Helicopter (AWR); Naval Aircrewman Mechanical (AWF); and Naval Aircrewman Avionics (AWV). All five service ratings are identified by a single AW Rating Badge. Many technologically advanced navies have a similar trade.


History of the AW Rating
The AW rating was originally established on 1 Sep 1968 by BuPers Note 1440 of 29 Feb 1968 as the "Aviation Antisubmarine Warfare Operator" rating (abbreviated AW). It identified those Sailors whose job it was to operate radar, sonar and other submarine detection systems installed in the Navy's submarine hunting fixed and rotary winged aircraft of the time. In 1993 the rating name was changed to "Aviation Warfare Systems Operator" (without changing the AW abbreviation) by BuPers Note 1440 of 16 Nov 1993. The change in the rating's name reflected the expanded scope of the duties performed by AW Sailors who were by then flying in newer, more multi-mission aircraft and were performing, depending on the specific aircraft type, anti-surface warfare, combat search and rescue and/or naval special warfare support missions in addition to their traditional antisubmarine warfare functions.  
In addition to Sailors in the AW rating, other Sailors primarily in aircraft maintenance ratings had been flying as crewmen aboard the Navy's various fixed and rotary winged utility, cargo or special mission aircraft performing airborne mine countermeasures, logistics, communications relay, airborne repair or maintenance of critical systems, flight engineer, loadmaster or other specialized functions.  
On 2 May of 2005, NAVADMIN 092/05 titled "Helicopter Enlisted Naval Aircrew Rating Consolidation" was released which directed the consolidation of all helicopter aircrewmen in maintenance ratings (those holding Navy Enlisted Classifications (NEC) of 78xx and 94xx) into the Aviation Warfare Systems Operator (AW) rating thereby bringing all helicopter aircrewmen into the AW rating. 
On 30 May of 2008, NAVADMIN 153/08 titled "Enlisted Naval Aircrew (NAC) Rating Consolidation" was released which brought about major changes to the AW rating. It changed the name of the AW rating from "Aviation Warfare Systems Operator" to "Naval Aircrewman" (while retaining the AW abbreviation); it converted all remaining aircrewmen with maintenance ratings to the AW rating (NAVADMIN 092/05 had previously converted all helicopter aircrewmen to the AW rating, but it had not converted the fixed wing maintenance rating crewmen to AW); and it subdivided the AW rating into five "service ratings." Those five service ratings being: Naval Aircrewman Operator (AWO); Naval Aircrewman Helicopter (AWS); Naval Aircrewman Tactical Helicopter (AWR); Naval Aircrewman Mechanical (AWF); and Naval Aircrewman Avionics (AWV).


Naval Aircrew Warfare Specialist
 Naval Aircrewmen are easily identified by the Gold Wings which they wear which are similar to the wings of Naval Aviators who pilot the aircraft and of Naval Flight Officers who along with the Naval Aircrewmen perform the critical non-pilot functions which are essential to operating and employing naval aircraft. These Gold Wings are earned after an AW completes his or her training pipeline and reports to his or her first operational squadron. Within 18 months of arrival in the squadron the new Naval Aircrewman is required to earn qualification as a "Naval Aircrew Warfare Specialist" (NAC). The qualification is earned through a training program in the squadron during which he or she is required to learn and demonstrate the knowledge and abilities required to operate and employ naval aircraft in the missions or tasks assigned.   
Upon satisfactory completion of the program and demonstration of the required knowledge by sitting for a qualification board of the squadrons leaders, the new AW is awarded the Gold Naval Aircrew Warfare Specialist "Wings" and the designation "NAC" is added to the Sailor's title or rate in the following manner "AWO2(NAC) John Smith." When spoken the designation "NAC" is spoken "Aircrew Warfare so "AWO2(NAC) John Smith" is spoken "Naval Aircrewman Operator Second Class, Aircrew Warfare, John Smith. 
Prior to the change in the name of the AW rating from "Aviation Warfare Systems Operator" to the current name "Naval Aircrewman", these Gold Wings were called "Naval Aircrew" Wings and the designation "(NAC)" was spoken "Naval Aircrew". 
Following is an example of the change in the names of the rating and the wings:
-Prior to the changes: AW2(NAC) John Smith, spoken as "Aviation Warfare Systems Operator 2nd Class, Naval Aircrew, John Smith.
-After the changes: AWS2(NAC) John Smith, spoken as "Naval Aircrewman Helicopter 2nd Class, Aircrew Warfare, John Smith.


Training

All AWs must attain a minimum amount of education and training in several fields of science, technology, and aviation at several different schools. The educational "pipeline" averages 18 months to 2 years in length. The following list describes most of those schools:


Schools


Naval Aircrew Candidate School (NACCS)
Naval Aircrew Candidate School (NACCS), at NAS Pensacola, Florida, trains and evaluates AW students in basic flight physiology and water survival. The course includes low-pressure hypobaric chamber training, night-vision evaluations, multi-station spatial-disorientation device (also known as the "spin and puke") training, and aircraft-emergency-water-egress device. The curriculum also includes advanced first aid and CPR and physical training with road runs up to 3-6 miles and one-mile swims.


AW “A” School
Naval Air Technical Training Center (NATTC) provides accession students a basic introduction to the fundamentals the student must be well versed in to operate on their prospective platform. Active and passive electronic warfare, active and passive sonar. Reading sonograms, magnetic anomaly detection equipment, physics, wave propagation, oceanography, meteorology and working with classified information are included in this phase of training.


Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE)
The Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) course is designed to provide Level "C" Code of Conduct training to pilots, flight officers, intelligence officers, aircrew, and other designated high-risk-of-capture personnel, as directed by respective TYCOMs/MCCDC in accordance with DOD Instruction 1300.21 and the Joint Personnel Recovery Agency (JPRA) executive agent instruction. Training encompasses those basic skills necessary for worldwide survival, facilitating search-and-rescue efforts, evading capture by hostile forces, resistance to interrogation, exploitation, and indoctrination, and escape from detention by enemy forces, in accordance with DOD Instruction 1300.21. It is based on and reinforces the values expressed in the code of conduct while maintaining an appropriate balance of sound educational methodology and realistic/stressful training scenarios.
Participation in SERE training requires certification of a current physical examination (within 1 year for aircrew) and completion of a medical-screening form within 14 days of training by competent medical authority (i.e., flight surgeon, IDC). If students report for training without medical and dental records, they are dis-enrolled from the course. Because SERE training is physically demanding, students must comply with their own service's body fat standards and have successfully passed their most recent physical-readiness test.


Fleet Replacement Aircrew Training (FRAC)
This phase of training immerses the student much further into training for their specific platform and specialty. Typically, the student will report to an East Coast or West Coast Fleet Replacement Squadron (FRS) to conduct training.  Naval Air Training and Operating Procedures Standardization (NATOPS) and tactics are also introduced. After completion of training and reporting for duty in the fleet, they are required to complete “on the job training” lasting around six months before being recognized as fully qualified.


Position summaries

There are several platforms (fixed wing P-3 Orion and rotary wing MH-60R/S aircraft, aircraft carriers, etc.) specialties and special certifications available within the rating. Additional training can be acquired to qualify rotary wing AWs as Combat Search and Rescue(CSAR) crewman. Below is a list of specialties within the rating.


Aviation Rescue Swimmer (AIRR)

(abbreviated as AWS/AWR)
These Aircrewmen have successfully completed Aviation Rescue Swimmer School (ARSS) in Pensacola, Florida along with the multiple schools in the training pipeline. According to multiple sources, the average pipeline graduation rate is 22%. Sailors who choose this career path need to possess above-average maturity and the ability to stay calm in high-stress situations. AIRR's are trained in basic emergency medicine, rappelling, and various other skills other AW's will not receive. They share many similarities to Coast Guard Aviation Survival Technicians. They are often utilized in humanitarian, combat, and peacetime missions. On average, with both the pipeline and required on-the-job training, it takes about two years to become a qualified AIRR. The training pipeline is as follows:

Aircrew Candidate School (3 weeks)
Rescue Swimmer School (5 weeks)
"A" School (7 weeks for AWS, 14 weeks for AWR)
SERE (2 weeks)
Fleet Replacement Squadrons (6-12 months at assigned Air Station)


AIRR Tactical Helicopter
(abbreviated as AWR)
AWRs go through NACCS and Rescue Swimmer Schools as well, then split off into their own pipeline from there. Going to A-School (13 weeks), FRAC(about 1 year long), SERE (2 weeks). AWRs perform the same jobs as regular AIRR crewman (AWS) as well as locating submarines using acoustics sensors, which has earned them the nickname "Subhunters". They also perform various Surface Warfare missions using Radar and other sensors on board the aircraft.


C-2A Loadmaster
These AWFs fly on the C-2A Greyhound, a carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft.  They fly high priority passengers, cargo, and mail to and from aircraft carriers. Their designations as loadmasters start from FRAC school at VAW-120 in Norfolk, Virginia where they become transport second crewman. From there these AWs complete on the job training, their NAWS package, and a second crewman board to become carrier transport second crewman. And then finally completing more job specific qualifications to become a carrier transport crew chief.  These AWF's are also highly skilled and qualified in the maintenance program and work hand in hand with their maintenance work centers to better improve their knowledge of the aircraft.


Naval Aircrewman (operator)
Aboard aircraft
Note: abbreviated as AWO, SS1, & SS2
These AWs fly in a fixed wing, long range patrol aircraft. Currently the P-3 Orion is fulfilling this role, with the P-8 Poseidon planned to take over this mission starting in 2013. Acoustic sensor operators begin their career in the fleet after attending specialized training. They start as sensor operator 2, and after sufficient flight and related experience is acquired, advance to sensor operator 1 with their own crew. The job can be related to the civilian fields of machine condition monitoring, or predictive maintenance. The AW is responsible for the analysis of all sensor data and must interpret this data in order to search for, localize and track, determine spatial orientation and vector, identify, assess condition of, establish attack parameters on a single, or multiple surface or subsurface contacts. These systems include but are not limited to passive sonar used to listen to underwater sounds, active sonar systems which can be used to pinpoint targets.  They control the type and settings for the sonobuoys, underwater communication equipment for platform to platform communication, sensor system to fire control system data transfer and recording.

Aboard aircraft
Note: abbreviated as AWO, SS3

Non-acoustic AWs, also known as "sensor 3s" or electronic warfare operators, (EWO's), currently fly in P-3 Orion aircraft, they will be transitioning to the P-8A Poseidon beginning in 2013. Non-acoustic AWs are responsible for operating the radar, electronic support measures system, electro-optical/infrared imaging devices and magnetic anomaly detection device aboard variants of the P-3 Orion. They acquire data necessary to identify surface or air contacts, and can also provide data to help search, localize, and track contacts of interest. SS3s aid in establishing attack parameters on a single, or multiple surface contact. Non-acoustic operators also work with the flight station and navigator to ensure safety-of-flight conditions are maintained.

Aboard ship or on land
Note: abbreviated as ASWMOD/ASWOC
These AWs brief and debrief aircrews, filter through, organize, and relay intelligence collected during the mission in an aircraft carrier ASW module (ASMOD) or in a land-based ASW operations center (ASWOC). They coordinate ASW information-gathering throughout the battle group, operate various under-sea warfare and non-under-sea warfare related sensor systems to extract, analyze and classify data obtained; perform specified pre-flight, in-flight and post-flight operations in a multitude of naval aircraft serving anti-surface, USW, mine countermeasures, electronic, counter-narcotics, and land and sea rescue missions performance; operate tactical support center systems to analyze and classify USW and non-USW data; assist in aircrew briefing and debriefing; and provide data base information to the tactical commander for use in prescribing mission objectives and tactics.


Previous platforms
Past AW-crewed aircraft include aircraft carrier-based S-3 Viking and S-2 Tracker aircraft. They also flew in SH-3 Sea King and SH-2 Seasprite helicopters and P-2 Neptune patrol aircraft.


See also
List of United States Navy ratings


References

United States Naval Aviation 1910–1995, Appendix 14, Aviation Ratings Naval Historical Center
http://www.navytimes.com/news/2008/05/navy_aircrewrating_052708w/

The Frank H. Neely Nuclear Research Center, also known as the Neely Research Reactor and the Georgia Tech Research Reactor, was a nuclear engineering research center on the Georgia Institute of Technology campus, which housed a 5 megawatt heavy water moderated and cooled research reactor from 1961 until 1995. It was decommissioned in November 1999. The building that housed the reactor was demolished to make way for the Marcus Nanotechnology Research Center.
The center is named for Frank H. Neely, a Georgia Tech graduate and businessman who organized the first Georgia Nuclear Advisory Commission, an essential step in the creation of the reactor and associated facilities.


History
The center and associated reactor was built after campus president Blake R. Van Leer appointed a Nuclear Science Committee, which included Georgia Tech Research Institute director James E. Boyd.
The committee recommended the creation of a Radioisotopes Laboratory Facility and a large research reactor. The laboratory was built and dedicated on January 7, 1959, and could receive, store, and process radioactive materials. The research reactor would be completed in 1963.
The reactor was shut down in 1988 due to safety concerns, and was defueled due to safety concerns related to the nearby 1996 Summer Olympics events.
The reactor building was torn down after the decommissioning, with the remainder removed as of 2015. 


References


External links
Georgia Tech Nuclear and Radiological Engineering Program
Neely Nuclear Research Center on the Georgia Tech Campus Map

Neko Oikawa (及川 眠子, Oikawa Neko; born February 10, 1960) is a Japanese lyricist who has written J-pop and anime theme songs over her career.


Biography
Neko Oikawa was born in Wakayama, Wakayama. She made her songwriting debut in 1985 with Kanako Wada's "Passing Through", which won the Mitsubishi Minica Mascot Song Contest. During her time with Fuji Pacific Music, Oikawa wrote songs for numerous Japanese idols; most notably the duo Wink. In 1989, her song "Samishii Nettaigyo" for Wink won the Grand Prix at the 31st Japan Record Awards and the 22nd All Japan Wired Broadcasting Awards. In 1994, her song "Tokyo" for Yashiki Takajin won the Yomiuri TV Best Award and Special Award at the All Japan Cable Broadcasting Awards.
Oikawa's most well-known song outside Japan is "A Cruel Angel's Thesis", recorded by Yoko Takahashi for the 1995 anime series Neon Genesis Evangelion. The song has been ranked by Joysound as the most popular song on karaoke. According to Oikawa, she receives between 1 and 1.5 yen for every time every time the song is played at a karaoke hall. Combined with the royalties from the Evangelion pachinko machines, Oikawa receives no less than ¥30 million annually from the song alone.
In 2017, Oikawa set up the Neko Oikawa Nonfiction Award (及川眠子ノンフィクション賞, Oikawa Neko Nonfikushon Shō) to encourage more writers to do nonfiction works.


Personal life
Oikawa had an affair with a Turkish man 18 years her junior in 2000 and traveled to Turkey to marry him in 2005. In their 13 years of marriage, they had only been together one-third of the time. She started going in debt during the marriage to the point where it reached ¥ 70 million by the time she filed for divorce in 2018. Oikawa published her biography Hakon (破婚; Breakdown), which detailed the last days of her marriage.


Works
Oikawa's works include the following:

Shoko Aida
"Tapestry"
Agnes Chan
"Propose"
Rina Chinen
"Pride + Joy"
Shizuka Kudo
"Sora no Shōmen"
Anthony Lun
"Ai ga Aru kara"
Alisa Mizuki
"Yasashii Yoru ni Aimashō"
Akina Nakamori
"Genshi, Onna wa Taiyō Datta"
Yōko Oginome
"Himawari"
"Sunao na Koi"
"Heaven"
"Shiawase wa Sunadokei no Yō ni"
"Always"
Noriko Sakai
"Eve no Tamago"
"Namida Hitotsubu"
Shonentai
"Excuse"
Super Monkey's
"Aishite Muscat"
"Wagamama wo Yurushite"
Yoko Takahashi
"A Cruel Angel's Thesis"
"Soul's Refrain"
Yashiki Takajin
"Tokyo"
Wink

Tokusatsu themes
"Ninpuu Sentai Hurricaneger"
"Juken Sentai Gekiranger"
"Shuriken Sentai Ninninger"
"Ultraman Max"


References


External links
Official website
Neko Oikawa discography at MusicBrainz
Neko Oikawa discography at Discogs

New York's 56th State Assembly district is one of the 150 districts in the New York State Assembly. It has been represented by Stefani Zinerman since 2021.


Geography
District 56 is in Brooklyn, encompassing Bedford-Stuyvesant and portions of Crown Heights.
The district overlaps (partially) with New York's 8th and 9th congressional districts, the 20th and 25th districts of the New York State Senate, and the 36th and 41st districts of the New York City Council.


Recent election results


2026


2024


2022


2020


2018


2016


2014


2012


2010


Federal results in Assembly District 56


References

Nguyễn Minh Nghĩa (c. 1977 – 4 March 2026) was a Vietnamese footballer who played for Đồng Tháp, Hoàng Anh Gia Lai, Cần Thơ and Vietnam U23.


Club career
Minh Nghĩa played as a prominent figure of the Đồng Tháp. At that time, he partnered with Nguyễn Trung Vĩnh, forming a notable attacking duo for the team from the Mekong Delta team.
Minh Nghĩa also played on Hoàng Anh Gia Lai when he scored the decisive goal against Đà Nẵng, this ends the match as a 3–2 win during the first match on the second half of the season. On 14 May 2006, he scored a hat-trick in just 7 minutes during the match against Sông Lam Nghệ An, helping his home team win 3–0. His contributions helped his team finish the 2006 V-League season in 4th place.
After he left Hoàng Anh Gia Lai, he spent his time playing Cần Thơ on the Vietnamese First Division until retirement.


International career
In 2001, he was Vietnam U23's squad for the 2001 SEA Games. Minh Nghĩa scored the fourth goal against Brunei during a 5–1 win. However, his team was eliminated in 3rd place on a group table.
On 30 October 2002, Minh Nghĩa was featured in the preliminary squad for the 2002 AFF Championship. However, he did not include in the final squad due to persistent leg injury.


Death
On 4 March 2026, he passed away as a result of an accident in the bathroom, at the age of 49.


References

Nikolay Matveevich Tatarinov (Russian: Николай Матвеевич Татаринов; 14 December 1927 – 29 May 2017) was a Soviet modern pentathlete and Olympic medalist. He competed at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome, where he won a silver medal in the team competition, and placed sixth in the individual competition.
Tatarinov was part of the Soviet teams that held world titles in 1957, 1958 and 1959; individually he won a bronze in 1957. Domestically, he placed second at the Soviet championships in 1957-60, and won team gold medals 1957-59. After retiring from competitions in 1962, he played competitive tennis in seniors tournaments and worked at the physical education department of the S. M. Kirov Military Medical Academy in Saint Petersburg.


References


External links
Nikolay Tatarinov at Olympedia
Nikolay Tatarinov at InterSportStats

Nishiwaki (西脇市, Nishiwaki-shi) is a city in Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan. As of 1 May 2022, the city had an estimated population of 39,001 in 17210 households and a population density of 290 persons per km2. The total area of the city is 132.44 square kilometres (51.14 sq mi). The city calls itself "The Navel of Japan (Nihon no Heso)." Located at the crossing of the 135° East meridian and the 35° North parallel, the city's Nihon no Heso Park marks the center of the nation


Geography
Nishiwaki is located in the northern Harima region of Hyōgo prefecture, about 50 kilometers north of Kobe city, bordered by the Chugoku Mountains to the north. The Kakogawa River, Sugihara River, and the Noma River flow through the city,


Neighbouring municipalities
Hyōgo Prefecture

Kasai
Katō
Sasayama
Taka
Tanba


Climate
Nishiwaki has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cfa) with hot summers and cool to cold winters. Precipitation is significantly higher in summer than in winter, though on the whole lower than most parts of Honshū, and there is no significant snowfall. The average annual temperature in Nishiwaki is 14.5 °C (58.1 °F). The average annual rainfall is 2,213.5 mm (87.15 in) with July as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in August, at around 26.8 °C (80.2 °F), and lowest in January, at around 3.1 °C (37.6 °F). The highest temperature ever recorded in Nishiwaki was 39.2 °C (102.6 °F) on 30 August 2020; the coldest temperature ever recorded was −8.6 °C (16.5 °F) on 3 February 2012.


Demographics
Per Japanese census data, the population of Nishiwaki in 2020 is 38,673 people. Nishiwaki has been conducting censuses since 1920.


History
The area of Nishiwaki was in ancient Harima Province. In the Edo Period, most of the area was tenryō territory under direct administration of the Tokugawa shogunate. Following the Meiji restoration, the village of Sugata, was created within Taka District, Hyōgo with the creation of the modern municipalities system April 1, 1889.  It was raised to town status on November 1, 1917, changing its name to Nishiwaki. On April 1, 1952 Nishiwaki merged with the neighboring villages of Hino, Shigeharu, and Hiesho to form the city of Nishiwaki. On October 1, 2005, the town of Kurodashō (from Taka District) was merged into Nishiwaki.


Government
Nishiwaki has a mayor-council form of government with a directly elected mayor and a unicameral city council of 16 members. Nishiwaki, together with the town of Taki, contributes one member to the Hyogo Prefectural Assembly. In terms of national politics, the city is part of Hyōgo 4th district of the lower house of the Diet of Japan.


Economy
From the middle of the Edo period (1792), the area has been noted for the production of a striped cloth per a technique introduced from Nishijin in Kyoto, called "Banshu weaving". In the latter half of the Meiji era became known nationwide, and still has a share of more than 70% of domestic yarn-dyed textiles. Other noted products include the production of Kobe beef.


Education
Nishiwaki has eight public elementary schools and four public middle schools operated by the city government and three public high schools operated by the Hyōgo Prefectural Department of Education.


Transportation


Railway
 JR West - Kakogawa Line

Nishiwakishi - Shin-Nishiwaki - Hie - Nihon-heso-kōen - Kurodashō - Hon-Kuroda - Funamachiguchi


Highways
 National Route 175
 National Route 427


Sister cities

  Renton, Washington, United States, since 1969. Since then there have been mutual exchanges between the cities, most notably the annual middle school exchange program which began in 1989 (the US delegation was in Japan October 3–13, 1989).


Culture


Mascots
Nisshi (にっしー) was made to promote the city in 2010, and she wears a blue clothes made of "Banshu-Ori", which is a kind of textile and famous in Nisiwaki city.
Sakura (さくら) is Nisshi's sister and wears pink clothes.
Heso-no-Kanchan (へそのかんちゃん) was made to promote a historical drama, Gunshi-Kanbe (軍師官兵衛), which had been broadcast in 2014.
"Kanchan" was designed after the model of Kanbe's appearance in his childhood.


Notable people from Nishiwaki
Iwaichi Fujiwara, army general
Yoshinori Tokura, physicist
Tadanori Yokoo, graphic designer


References


External links
 Media related to Nishiwaki, Hyōgo at Wikimedia Commons
Nishiwaki City official website (in Japanese)

The Nissan Teana (Japanese: 日産・ティアナ, Hepburn: Nissan Tiana) is a mid-size sedan produced by Japanese automobile manufacturer Nissan. It was exported as the Nissan Maxima and Nissan Cefiro to certain markets. It replaces the Nissan Bluebird, Laurel and Cefiro. It shares a platform with the Nissan Maxima and Nissan Altima which are sold in North America, as well as the Japanese market Presage minivan. The Teana has been available in East Asia, Russia, Ukraine, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Australia, New Zealand, Latin America and the Caribbean.
As of 2007 the Teana shares its platform with its French cousin, the Renault Laguna and Renault Latitude in most of Europe, the Middle East and Africa, and in Southeast Asia as the Renault Samsung SM5.
With the introduction of the Teana, Nissan continued the J lineage for the model codes (J31 and J32) from the Nissan Maxima (J30). Starting with the introduction of the third generation in 2013, the Teana became a badge engineered version of the North American Altima. The Teana nameplate was temporarily retired in 2020, being replaced by the L34 Altima or discontinued without any successor in some markets. The nameplate returned in 2025 for the Chinese market.
The name "Teana" is from that of a small village in Italy, sharing a naming influence for the Nissan Murano which was released in the same era, which was named after another city in Italy.


First generation (J31; 2003)

The J31 series Teana was first introduced in February 2003 to the Japanese market as a sedan companion to the Murano with both vehicles exclusive to Japanese Nissan dealerships called Nissan Red Stage. It replaced the Bluebird and Cefiro in Japan, along with the Laurel. It was considered one level below the Skyline. The Teana was designed around a cosseting, homelike interior with colours and materials inspired by interior design rather than the technological style used in most cars at the time. It was introduced with an optionally available internet-based, telematics and GPS navigation system called CarWings to Japanese drivers only.
The J31 Teana follows the same chassis number pattern as the Maxima (J30). In most of the world, the Teana was Nissan's largest front-wheel drive sedan, while the Skyline and Fuga are built on rear-wheel drive platforms.
Despite being largely unrelated to the long running Cefiro line, Nissan marketed the Teana using the Cefiro nameplate in Hong Kong, Singapore, Mauritius, Brunei, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Latin America, and the Caribbean while it was sold under the name of Teana in Japan, Thailand, Philippines, India, Taiwan, Malaysia, Indonesia and Mainland China. The car was marketed as the Maxima in Australia and New Zealand.
It was introduced a month later to other Asian markets like Singapore. In 2004 the car arrived on European shores, replacing the Maxima QX.
Powering the Teana was either a 1998 cc, 2349 cc or 3498 cc engine matched to automatic transmissions. Power outputs vary somewhat between the different markets. Trim levels were 200JK, 230JK, 230JM and 350JM. The car was based on the Nissan FF-L platform. In December 2005, the Teana received new headlights and taillights, chrome trimming on the bumpers, enlarged foglights, front legrests and newly designed gauges. The car was also shortened slightly, and the clear rear turn signals were replaced by amber ones. XTronic CVT was also mated to all the engines.
In mainland China, the Teana was manufactured by the Dongfeng Motor Company, a joint venture with Nissan. In Taiwan, it was manufactured by Yulon Motor. In the neighbouring country of Pakistan, the Teana was known as the Cefiro and was assembled in Karachi. Additionally, it was sold in India, Russia, Ukraine as well as in New Zealand and Australia where it competes with the locally produced Mitsubishi 380 and Toyota Aurion under the Maxima badge. The first generation Teana was also assembled in Thailand for sale in the Southeast Asian market.
A restyled version was sold in South Korea as the Renault Samsung SM7. In January 2005, Renault Samsung announced a lower-specification version of the Teana which it sold as the second generation (A34R) Renault Samsung SM5 and, from 2008, as the Renault Safrane.
In some countries, the 200JK was not sold. This was replaced by the 230JK, basically a 230JM with less equipment. In Australia, the Maxima was sold in ST-L, Ti and Ti-L trim levels. The Ti-L trim was dropped after the facelift in 2005.
In 2008, Nissan stopped production of the J31 but production continued in Thailand until 2009.


Engines and specifications
The first generation Teana utilized a number of engines, namely the QR20DE, VQ23DE and a slightly detuned version of the VQ35DE.


Second generation (J32; 2008)

Nissan revealed the second generation, redesigned Teana at the 2008 Beijing Auto Show. The new Teana was based on the Nissan D platform also used by the new North American Nissan Maxima and Nissan Altima. Engine choices include a 3498 cc V6 (which required high octane gasoline), a 2495 cc V6, a 2488 cc inline-four, and a 1997 cc inline-four, all with a continuously variable transmission. The car's design was previewed by the Intima concept car shown in October 2007. In Japan, the sole I4 engine offered was the QR25DE 2488cc four-cylinder engine and was only available with four-wheel-drive; four-wheel-drive was not available for V6 engines due to packaging constraints. In Japan, the 3.5-liter engine was discontinued in January 2013, leaving only the smaller 2.5 options.
The car was launched in Japan, Taiwan, India, Iran, Mauritius, Russia, China, Brunei, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Trinidad and Tobago, Thailand, Singapore, Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, and Australia. This generation was not sold in Western Europe, where its French cousin, the Renault Laguna was offered, alongside the longer Franco-Korean Renault Latitude. 
Nissan continued to offer an optionally available internet-based, telematics and GPS navigation system called CarWings but to Japanese drivers only.
From this generation forward, the car stereo system had an optionally available feature called Music Box which allowed users to record CDs and listen to them. This system was also available on the Maxima and Altima.
The Teana shares most of the platform and mechanicals with its North American cousin, the Altima which is built and sold primarily in North America. The J32 has been sold in Australia as a Maxima since June 2009 with model designations of 250 ST-L, 350 ST-S and 350 Ti. These models have features unique to Australia and New Zealand including alloy wheel design, rear spoiler and interior upholstery fittings. In late 2011, all three Australian models received an equipment upgrade, with prices remaining unchanged. The Cefiro nameplate has been discontinued on the second-generation line. In Japan, China, Southeast Asia, and the Caribbean, the vehicle was known as the Teana.


Specifications
The second generation Teana utilized different engines, namely the MR20DE (successor of the QR series) four-cylinder for the Chinese market, and the VQ25DE and VQ35DE V6 engines for Japan and most export markets. The latter six was tweaked to produce 20 more PS than the first generation Teana. The Japanese-exclusive four-wheel drive model "FOUR" used a QR25DE four-cylinder engine.


Third generation (L33; 2013)

The third generation Teana was introduced in 2013 to some markets as a rebadged version of the North American L33 Altima.


Fourth generation (L34; 2025)

The fourth generation Teana was introduced in 2025 to the Chinese market with the Teana  name as a more premium variant of the L34 Altima. The L34 generation in China was originally launched as the Altima in December 2018 while retaining the original Chinese name of the Teana, Tianlai (天籁), and received a facelift in 2022. The 2026 model year Teana was unveiled in August 2025 to be sold alongside the outgoing Altima and is equipped with Huawei's Harmony Space 5.


Sales


References


External links

(in Japanese) Official Japanese site

Japanese girl group NiziU has released two studio albums, three extended plays, two single albums, and twenty singles. As of December 2024, the group had sold approximately 3.3 million album and single copies in Japan.
Prior to their debut, the group released the digital extended play Make You Happy in June 2020. They made their official debut in November 2020, with the maxi single "Step and a Step". The single debuted on the top of the Oricon Singles Chart and Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart, and received a platinum certification for physical sales and gold certification for digital sales, with approximately 500,000 copies sold in total. Additionally, it also received a platinum certification for streaming.
The group's debut studio album, U, topped both the Oricon Albums Chart and the Billboard Japan Hot Albums chart, and received a platinum certification for physical sales, with approximately 250,000 copies sold.


Studio albums


Compilation albums


Extended plays


Single albums


Singles


Japanese singles


Korean singles


Other charted songs


Japanese songs


Korean songs


Notes


References

Norfolk Community Health and Care NHS Trust was a provider of community services to a population of about 882,000 in Norfolk.  It was  established under the Transforming Community Services initiative. It comprises the community services previously run by Norfolk Primary Care Trust.
It employs 2,250 full-time equivalent members of staff.  Roisin Fallon-Williams was appointed chief executive in March 2015. in succession to Michael Scott. Lisa Christensen, former head of Norfolk County Council's children's services department resigned after two weeks as a non-executive member of the board in November 2014.
It is part of a joint venture with West Suffolk NHS Foundation Trust and Ipswich Hospital NHS Trust which took over the provision of community care in Suffolk from Serco in October 2015.


Performance
The trust was rated outstanding by the Care Quality Commission in 2018.  "There were many notable examples of outstanding practice… We saw examples where patients had become members of steering groups and attended staff mandatory training days to provide patient perspectives to staff."
In 2022 it set up a remote monitoring service using Inhealthcare software to help increase life expectancy and  quality of life for patients diagnosed with heart failure.  Patients will monitor their own vital signs at home and relay the readings to clinicians, who will intervene if they provide any cause for concern.  This should produce significant reductions in hospital bed days, A&E attendances, GP visits, travel to hospitals and out-of-hours appointments.


Merger
On 1 April 2026 the trust merged with Cambridgeshire Community Services NHS Trust to form East of England Community Health and Care NHS Trust.


References

Novelty (derived from Latin word novus for "new") is the quality of being new, or following from that, of being striking, original or unusual. Novelty may be the shared experience of a new cultural phenomenon or the subjective perception of an individual.
From the meaning of being unusual, usage is derived the concept of the novelty dance (a type of dance that is popular for being unusual or humorous); the novelty song (a musical item that capitalizes on something new, unusual, or a current fad); the novelty show (a competition or display in which exhibits or specimens are in way some novel); and novelty architecture (a building or other structure that is interesting because it has an amusing design). It is also this sense that applies to a novelty item, a small manufactured adornment, toy or collectible. These, in turn are often used as promotional merchandise in marketing. The chess term novelty is used for a move in chess which has never been played before in a recorded game.
The term can have pejorative sense and refer to a mere innovation. However, novelty in patent law is part of the legal test to determine whether an invention is patentable. A novelty effect is the tendency for performance to initially improve when new technology is instituted.


See also
Creativity
Innovation
Interest (emotion)
Invention
Novelty theory
One-hit wonder


References


External links

O Hui-sun (born 22 November 1993) was a North Korean football midfielder who played for the North Korea women's national football team.
She participated at the 2012 Summer Olympics. At the club level, she played for Sobaeksu.


See also
North Korea at the 2012 Summer Olympics


References


External links
O Hui-sun – FIFA competition record (archived)
Profile at sports-reference.com

Ominami, Ōminami or Oominami (written: 大南) is a Japanese surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Carlos Ominami (born 1950), Chilean economist and politician
Marco Enríquez-Ominami (born 1973), Chilean politician and adopted son of the former
Hiromi Ominami (大南 博美; born 1975), Japanese long-distance runner
Takami Ominami (大南 敬美; born 1975), Japanese long-distance runner
Takuma Ominami (大南 拓磨; born 1997), Japanese footballer


See also
Marco Enríquez-Ominami, Chilean filmmaker and politician

The Osaka Shion Wind Orchestra (オオサカ・シオン・ウインド・オーケストラ, Ōsaka Shion Uindo Ōkesutora), former Osaka Municipal Symphonic Band (大阪市音楽団, Ōsaka-shi Ongakudan) (OMSB), Osaka City Wind Orchestra, also known as Shion (市音, シオン) is a professional concert band based in Osaka, Japan. OMSB was established in 1923, which is the longest running wind orchestra in Japan. OMSB was under the direct management of the city of Osaka.


History
The origin of OMSB is the Imperial Japanese Army 4th Division Band (大日本帝国陸軍第4師団軍楽隊, Dai-Nippon Teikoku Rikugun Daiyon Shidan Gungakutai) founded in 1888.


The IJA Fourth Division Band
February 28, 1888 – The attachment of the Third Military Band to the Osaka Garrison was determined.
March 6, 1888 – The bandmaster and a fifty-piece military band took up their duties.
May 14, 1888 – With the reorganization of the military system, the Osaka Garrison has been abolished and the fourth division was formed.
March 25, 1923 – The 4th Division Band has disbanded due to disarmament. The farewell concert was held at the Tennouji Music Hall.


Osaka Municipal Symphonic Band
June 1, 1923 – Volunteers who were the former band members established Osaka Music Band (大阪市音楽隊, Ōsaka-shi Ongakutai). They managed the band under the membership system in those days. Funds for management were depended on a subsidy from Osaka city and earnings from requested performances.
April 1, 1934 – OMSB came under the direct management of the city of Osaka, and all the members of OMSB became city officials.
June 22, 1946 – The band name has renamed as Osaka Municipal Symphonic Band (大阪市音楽団, Ōsaka-shi Ongakudan).
Since 1962 – OMSB has taken charge of recordings of an entrance march for the National High School Baseball Invitational Tournament every year.


Osaka City Wind Orchestra
April 1, 2014 – OMSB has been privatized as a general incorporated association. The English name has renamed as Osaka City Wind Orchestra.


Osaka Shion Wind Orchestra
July 1, 2014 – The English name has renamed as Osaka Shion Wind Orchestra.
March 16, 2015 – The band name has renamed as Osaka Shion Wind Orchestra (オオサカ・シオン・ウインド・オーケストラ, Ōsaka Shion Uindo Ōkesutora).
April 1, 2018 – The organization has been a public interest incorporated association.


Conductors
Hong-Jae Kim (1991–1994 Principal Conductor)
Heinz Friesen (1995–1998 Principal Conductor)
Shunsaku Tsutsumi (1998–2002　Artistic Adviser, Principal Conductor)
Kazumasa Watanabe (2001–2002 Principal Guest Conductor)
Kazuyoshi Akiyama (2003 – Special Conductor, Artistic Adviser)
Kazuhiko Komatsu (2007–2013 Principal Guest Conductor)
Akira Miyagawa (2010–2013 Artistic Director, 2014 – Music Director)
You Nishimura (2017–2020 Resident Conductor)


External links
Official website  (in Japanese)
David G. Hebert (2012). "Wind Bands and Cultural Identity in Japanese Schools". Dordrecht and New York: Springer.

Osini is a village and comune (municipality) in the Province of Ogliastra in the autonomous island region of Sardinia in Italy, located about 70 kilometres (43 mi) northeast of Cagliari and about 20 kilometres (12 mi) southwest of Tortolì. It has 681 inhabitants.
The Nuraghe Serbissi is located in Osini's municipal territory.
Osini borders the municipalities of Cardedu, Gairo, Jerzu, Lanusei, Loceri, Tertenia, Ulassai, and Ussassai.


Demographics
As of 2026, the population is 681, of which 52.9% are male, and 47.1% are female. Minors make up 10.6% of the population, and seniors make up 37.6%.


Immigration
As of 2025, immigrants make up 4.8% of the total population. The 5 largest foreign countries of birth are France, Romania, Argentina, Germany, and Luxembourg.


References

Our Crowd: The Great Jewish Families of New York (1967) is a history book by American writer Stephen Birmingham. The book documents the lives of prominent New York Jewish families of the 19th century. Historian Louis Auchincloss called it "A fascinating and absorbing chapter of New York social and financial history. ... " It has been reprinted 14 times as of 2007.


Review
The reception which has been accorded "Our Crowd" shows that the subject was certainly ripe for exploitation. The book has been a best-seller for the past several months; indeed, it has been at the head of the non-fiction list for much of that time. What is more, no one has yet challenged the claim put forward by the book of an exalted social position for Jews. In fact, the opposite has been the case. Louis Auchincloss, who has devoted his talents to the delineation of the WASP upper class of the New York Metropolitan area, has even said that it is hard to understand why "Our Crowd" should only have been the first account of the Jewish upper class.


Official information
Birmingham, Stephen (1967). "Our Crowd: The Great Jewish Families of New York (1967). New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 9781579124359.


References


External links
"Our Crowd: The Great Jewish Families of New York (1967)", Time
Information at Worldcat.com
"Our Crowd" at Google Books (1996 printing, with preview)

Owen Daniel (11 April 1875 – 5 January 1936) was a member of the Queensland Legislative Assembly.


Biography
Daniel was born at Pontardawe, Glamorganshire, the son of Rees Daniel and his wife Ann. He was educated in Wales and after leaving school worked as a furnace-man in an iron and steel mill. He arrived in Queensland in 1900 where he set up several different businesses in Rockhampton including a tobacconist and casket agency.
On 22 December 1894 he married Sarah Ann Jenkins and together had three sons and two daughters. Sarah died in 1933 and the next year Daniel married Elvera Mary Petersen. He died in Rockhampton in January 1936 with his funeral proceeding from his Yaamba Rd residence to the South Rockhampton Cemetery.


Public career
Daniel started in politics as an alderman on the Rockhampton City Council before resigning in 1929. He was then Chairman of the Livingstone Shire Council from 1933 until his death in 1936.
At the 1929 Queensland state election, Daniel, representing the Country and Progressive National Party, won the seat of Keppel in the Queensland Legislative Assembly. He defeated the long-standing member, James Larcombe of the Labor Party. He went on to represent Keppel until his death in 1936. At the subsequent by-election, his son David took over representing the electorate.
Daniel was prominently associated with the friendly societies and at one stage was president and secretary of the Medical Institute.
He was chairman of the Hospitals Board and a committee member of the Ambulance Brigade. A Mason, He was past-master of the Mt Chalmers lodge and a member of the Yeppoon lodge.


References

PS I Love You are a Canadian indie rock duo based in Kingston, Ontario, consisting of Paul Saulnier on vocals/guitar/bass pedals and Benjamin Nelson on drums. The band is signed to Canadian independent record label Paper Bag Records. The band is known for its forceful themes, guitar effects, and loud percussion.


History
PS I Love You, a play on lead-singer and guitarist Paul Saulnier's initials, formed in Kingston, Ontario in 2006 as a solo project. Drummer Benjamin Nelson joined in 2008. Saulnier and Nelson had previously worked together in another Kingston band, Magic Jordan. The band gained notoriety as a result of a split 7-inch with artist Diamond Rings, which led to both groups gaining favourable reviews.
The band's debut album, Meet Me at the Muster Station, was released in October, 2010 to favourable reviews from Pitchfork Media, who praised the track "Facelove" as "Best New Music"., and also from Exclaim! Magazine, which included it on its list of Top Pop & Rock Albums of 2010. Meet Me at the Muster Station appeared on the !Earshot National Top 50 Chart, and was longlisted for the 2011 Polaris Music Prize.
Their second album, Death Dreams, was released on May 8, 2012, on Paper Bag Records. The record was also included on the Polaris Prize Long List.
The band released their third studio album, For Those Who Stay, on July 22, 2014, on Paperbag Records.


Band members
Members

Paul Saulnier – lead vocals, guitar, bass, bass pedals
Benjamin Nelson – drums, percussion, backing vocals
Touring members

Tim Bruton – bass, rhythm guitars, keyboards, backing vocals (2011–present)


Discography


Studio albums


Live albums


Extended plays


References


External links
PS I Love You at AllMusic
A scary Q&A with Paul Saulnier re. "Death Dreams" (via Talk Rock To Me) May 30, 2012
Inescapable...in a good way: A feature interview with Paul Saulnier (via Talk Rock To Me) July 29, 2011

The Papagayo Jet, also referred to as the Papagayo Wind or the Papagayo Wind Jet, is strong intermittent winds that blow approximately 70 km north of the Gulf of Papagayo, after which they are named. The jet winds travel southwest from the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific Ocean through a pass in the Cordillera mountains at Lake Nicaragua. The jet follows the same path as the northeast trade winds in this region; however, due to a unique combination of synoptic scale meteorology and orographic phenomena, the jet winds can reach much greater speeds than their trade wind counterparts. That is to say, the winds occur when cold high-pressure systems from the North American continent meet warm moist air over the Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico, generating winds that are then funneled through a mountain pass in the Cordillera. The Papagayo Jet is also not unique to this region. There are two other breaks in the Cordillera where this same phenomenon occurs, one at the Chivela Pass in Mexico and another at the Panama Canal, producing the Tehuano (Tehuantepecer) and the Panama jets respectively.
The Papagayo Jet also induces mesoscale meteorology phenomena that influence the pacific waters hundreds of kilometers off the Nicaraguan and Costa Rican shores. When the jet wind surges, it creates cyclonic and anticyclonic eddies, Ekman transport, and upwelling that contribute to the creation of the Costa Rica Dome off the western coast of Central America in the Western Hemisphere Warm Pool (WHWP). The relatively cold, nutrient-rich waters of the dome, in comparison to the surrounding WHWP, create an ideal habitat for a number of species making the Papagayo Wind Jet important for biodiversity in the Eastern Tropical Pacific.


Formation
In North and Central America, during the Northern Hemisphere winter, high-pressure systems are created between the equator and 35th parallels north via atmospheric circulation. Air near the equator is warmed by the sun. This heated air is more buoyant than colder air so it rises and is then pushed poleward by more air rising from below. Once the air reaches northern latitudes it begins to cool and as a result it falls back towards to the Earth's surface. As the air is falling it exerts more pressure downward on the surface, creating a high-pressure system. This cold, high-pressure air mass then travels equatorward. Air masses repeatedly move in this loop, but due to the Coriolis force, this convection is not perfectly aligned south to north. In actuality, the air moves clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere, as it moves from the equator to higher latitudes and then back to the equator again.

The air travelling clockwise off the North American continent is cold and dense, with a high pressure. As it moves southwest over the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico, it meets warm, moist air with a comparatively low pressure. This establishes a dramatic pressure gradient, causing the cold, high-pressure air to flow quickly into the low-pressure area. This is analogous to air flowing rapidly out of a balloon when the neck of the balloon is left open. The air in the balloon has a higher pressure than the surrounding air so the air flows out of the balloon until the pressure inside and outside of the balloon is equal.
If Central America were topographically flat, the air would flow uninterrupted from the Caribbean to the Pacific Ocean; however, the Cordillera mountains, which run along the west coast of Central America, block this flow. As a result, the air is funneled into a narrow mountain pass near Lake Nicaragua and the Gulf of Papagayo, creating the Papagayo Jet. Again, the balloon example serves as an analogy of how the Papagayo Jet forms; the air moving out of the balloon cannot escape all at once because there is only a small opening that allows for the release of air. The narrow opening of the balloon facilitates the creation of a wind because the air velocity increases through the balloon neck. Like the wind blowing through the balloon neck, the Papagayo winds reach high speeds as they travel through the break in the Cordillera. For context, Papagayo jet winds have mean speeds of 20 meters per second (72 km/h; 45 mph) and can reach speeds of up to 30 meters per second (110 km/h; 67 mph), in comparison with average trade wind speeds of 25 km/h. Once the Papagayo Jet winds reach the Pacific Ocean they slow considerably and merge with the trade winds. Papagayo wind jet surges can occur intermittently every few weeks and last several days during the Northern Hemisphere winter.
The jet is most prominent in the winter months because the pressure gradient is largest between the two air masses during this time of the year. The greater the difference in temperature between the two air masses, the faster the air will flow from an area of high pressure into an area of low pressure. In the spring, summer, and fall months the air mass from the North American continent is much warmer so the resultant air flow is less dramatic and the wind speeds are not as high. In sum, wind speeds in the Papagayo Jet will be high through the months of November to March, peaking in February, then they will be reduced from April to August, and finally diminish completely in September.


Influence on the Costa Rica Dome
The Papagayo Jet winds are strong enough to influence the ocean waters off the west coast of Central America, namely being one of the factors responsible for the Costa Rica Dome. The Costa Rica Dome is a roughly circular area of anomalously cold water in the eastern tropical Pacific. It has a diameter of approximately 300-500 kilometers and is centered approximately 300 kilometers west of the Gulf of Papagayo. The waters surrounding the dome (known as the Western Hemisphere Warm Pool) are considerably warmer due to heating from the sun, given the region's proximity to the equator. The existence of the Costa Rica Dome can be attributed to a multitude of mesoscale oceanic effects; however, the Papagayo Jet plays a considerable role in the size, movement, and continued existence of the dome throughout the year.
As the Papagayo winds blow during the winter months they cool the surface ocean water in their path causing the extension of the Costa Rica Dome east (from 300 to approximately 1000 kilometers in diameter) to the Nicaraguan and Costa Rican coastlines. The mechanism for this cooling is explained by the influence of the Papagayo winds on the ocean surface currents. As the winds blow southwest over the Pacific they create cyclonic and anticyclonic coastal eddies on the water surface due to Ekman pumping. These coastal eddies generate the upwelling of cold water from greater ocean depths where the rising cold water then mixes with the warmer water near the surface and subsequently lowers sea surface temperatures. Therefore, the Papagayo Jet indirectly cools the coastal waters off the shores of Nicaragua and Costa Rica, extending the Costa Rica Dome. During the winter months, the coastal eddies and by extension the Papagayo Jet, are thought to be the primary drivers of the dome. Model simulations indicate that without the Papagayo Jet the Costa Rica Dome would not grow to such a large extent and may not even persist year-round.


Impact on regional biodiversity

The Papagayo Jet is an important meteorological phenomenon when considering ocean biodiversity in the eastern tropical Pacific. The jet plays a key role in lowering sea surface temperatures, through the influence on the Costa Rica Dome. The movement and growth of the dome is caused by the seasonal variability of the jet where the annual upwelling and mixing caused by the Papagayo Jet during dome extension allows for the transport of nutrient-rich cold waters to the surface. If the jet was a permanent feature (and by extension, the dome was also permanent) there would be no seasonal transport of nutrients via cold water upwelling. Indirect evidence of this nutrient transport can be seen in satellite imagery showing increased chlorophyll production in the surface waters directly under the path of the jet. The dome has also shown to be an area with increased zooplankton biomass as well as an area inhabited by blue whales who seem to follow the dome as it migrates in the eastern tropical Pacific waters.


See also
Hadley Cell


References

"Parisien Du Nord" (French for "Parisian of the North") is a song by Algerian singer Cheb Mami and French-Algerian rapper K-Mel, originally recorded for Mami's eighth studio album Meli Meli. A remixed version was later re-produced and released as a single by Virgin Records in 1998, achieving significant commercial success. The remix was included on a reissue of his album released by Virgin Records.


Background and composition
During the late 1990s, the fusion of traditional Algerian Raï music with French hip hop and R&B became highly popular in France, leading to a distinct subgenre often referred to as Raï'n'B. "Parisien Du Nord" is one of the most prominent examples of this cultural crossover. 
The song's production was handled by Pascal Perez, better known as Imhotep, the beatmaker for the Marseille-based hip hop group IAM. The lyrics alternate between K-Mel's socially conscious French rap verses, which discuss the struggles and identity issues of North African immigrants living in France, and Cheb Mami's melancholic, soaring Arabic vocals in the chorus. Musically, the track relies on heavy sampling combined with Mami's distinct raï vocal deliveries. The beat interpolates and samples two classic hip hop and electro tracks: "Funk You Up" by American female hip-hop trio The Sequence and "Change the Beat (French Rap)" by French rapper Beside.
The song's thematic focus on immigration, racism, and the feeling of being treated as an outsider in one's own country ("sur mon visage vous m'avez renié et dit étranger" / "on my face you denied me and called me a foreigner") resonated deeply with the French-Maghrebi youth.


Commercial performance
"Parisien Du Nord" was a major commercial success in Francophone Europe. It received heavy rotation on French radio and music television channels. The single peaked at number 5 on the French SNEP Singles Chart and reached number 8 on the Belgian Ultratop Wallonia chart, remaining on the charts for multiple weeks and becoming one of the defining French hits of 1998 and 1999.


Track listing
French CD Single
"Parisien Du Nord" – 3:29
"Parisien Du Nord" (Instrumental) – 3:22


Charts


References

Pasquale Joseph Martinelli (July 27, 1919 – September 7, 1992) was an American professional football center. He played college football for the Scranton Royals. After college, he played professionally for the Wilmington Clippers of the American Association (AA) from 1941 to 1942, the Buffalo Bisons of the All-America Football Conference (AAFC) in 1946, the Scranton Miners of the American Football League (AFL) in 1946, and the Clippers again from 1946 to 1949.


References

Paul Adrian Negulescu is an American cell biologist. He is a Senior Vice President at American pharmaceutical company Vertex Pharmaceuticals. He received the 2022 Shaw Prize in Life science and medicine, together with Michael J. Welsh, for their work that uncovered the etiology of cystic fibrosis and developed effective medications.


Early life and education
Negulescu was born in San Francisco to first-generation immigrants from Romania. His father was a surgeon, and his grandfather, Constantin Vișoianu, was a former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Romania. He has a brother.
Thanks to his childhood experience, he initially wanted to graduate with history from the University of California, Berkeley. A third-year physiology class taught by Roger Y. Tsien had a great influence on Negulescu, who eventually graduated with a dual degree in history and physiology in 1986. He then went on and studied PhD in physiology under Terry Machen, completing it in 1990.


Career
Negulescu started his career as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of California, Berkeley and under Michael Cahalan at the University of California, Irvine. He was planning to move to the University of Connecticut when Roger Y. Tsien asked him to join a startup company he was forming called Aurora Biosciences. Negulescu joined Aurora Biosciences in 1996 as one of the first employees. He became Senior Vice President of Discovery Biology in 1999. When Vertex Pharmaceuticals acquired Aurora Biosciences in 2001, he was appointed Senior Vice President of Research. Negulescu has been leading the San Diego Research Center of Vertex Pharmaceuticals since 2003.


Research
Negulescu's research focuses on the therapy of cystic fibrosis. Cystic fibrosis can be caused by any of the thousands of identified mutations in the CFTR protein, an ion channel that allows chloride ions to pass through. These mutations have been classified into Class I to V, with Class III mutations causing defective channel gates in CFTR despite normal expression of the protein. Via high-throughput screening, his team at Vertex Pharmaceuticals discovered ivacaftor, a small-molecule potentiator that increases the probability that mutated CFTR gates will open. Ivacaftor was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for cystic fibrosis patients with one specific Class III mutation in 2012, and has since been approved for mutation classes as well. Of note, the expanded approval in 2017 was based solely on in vitro data, due to the small number of patients carrying those rare mutations making clinical trials impossible.
Negulescu also led the discovery of another cystic fibrosis drug, lumacaftor, which is known as a "corrector" as it acts as a chaperone to help the CFTR protein fold correctly. Thus, it can be used in patients with Class II mutations, which create misfolded CFTR protein that cannot reaching the cell surface. The most common Class II mutation is F508del. Again with high-throughput screening, Negulescu and his team found that lumacaftor can correct F508del-mutated CFTR protein. It was later found that the drug was not effective enough when administered on its own, but was so when administered together with ivacaftor. The FDA approved this drug combination in 2015. Further research led to the discovery of tezacaftor and elexacaftor, 2 other correctors of the CFTR protein. The triple combination elexacaftor/tezacaftor/ivacaftor was approved by the FDA in 2019.


Honors and awards
2018 - Warren Alpert Foundation Prize
2022 - Shaw Prize in Life Science & Medicine
2023 - Wiley Prize
2024 - Breakthrough Prize in Life Sciences


Personal life
Negulescu met his wife, Debbie, during his time at the University of California, Irvine.


References

Pedro Luís da Fonseca is an Angolan politician and economist. He served as Minister of Economy and Planning of Angola from 2017 to 2019.


Biography
He was born in Luanda on November 17, 1957. He graduated in Economics at the Higher Institute of Economics, Karl Marx in Bulgaria – now University of National and World Economy (1986). Following his studies, in 1988, he started working at the Angolan Trade Ministry as National Director of International Economics Relations and Trade National Director, a position he held until 1994. He was then, in 1996, appointed for a year as National Director of Economic Planning before becoming the National Director of Studies and Planning until 2007. In 2007, he became Deputy Minister of Planning, continuing this until 2012. He was then appointed State Secretary of Planning and Territorial Development, the last position he held before becoming minister.
From October 2017 to July 2019 he served as Minister of Economy and Planning of Angola under President João Lourenço. Following his resignation from the position, in August 2019, he became President of the Board of Directors of Banco Económico.
In 2022, he was appointed as President of the Board of Directors of the Banco de Comércio e Indústria (BCI). Closely prior to his appointment, BCI was acquired by the Cart Group, which has been tied to the Angolan government. BCI was under significant financial losses whenever Fonseca took leadership, and was required to submit a restructuring plan. Some criticism was given over his appointment, with some arguing that it reflects the continuity of ruling parties, and that most banks were filled by former government officials. In 2024, the Angolan government announced that he would serve as Alternative Executive Director assisting the Nigerian Zainab Ahmed, until he would eventually start in 2026, becoming Executive Director at the World Bank for Angola, South Africa, and Nigeria.


Other activities
World Bank, Ex-Officio Alternate Member of the Board of Governors


References

Perfume de Gardênia (Perfume of Gardenia) is a 1992 Brazilian-Argentine drama film directed by Guilherme de Almeida Prado. It was screened at the 1992 Montreal World Film Festival. The filming took place in April 1991, with its production lasting until February 1992.


Synopsis
Daniel is a taxi driver, he works the night to pay the car payments, is married to a housewife Adalgisa and have a son. By chance, she starts making pornochanchada films, abandons the family and is prohibited by Daniel to see Joaquim. For eleven years, Daniel nurtures a sense of revenge, which gains strength when Joaquim, as an adult, finds his mother in full decay professional.


Cast
Christiane Torloni as Adalgisa
José Mayer as Daniel
Marcelo Ribeiro as Joaquim (as a child)
Walter Quiroz as Joaquim (as an adult)
Cláudio Marzo as delegate
Betty Faria as Odete Vargas
José Lewgoy as Ody Marques
Raul Gazolla as César Lamas
Helena Ignez
Oscar Magrini
Sérgio Mamberti
Matilde Mastrangi
Paulo Villaça


Awards and nominations

Festival de Brasília 1992 (Brazil)

Won the categories of best actor (José Mayer), best supporting character actor (José Lewgoy) and best supporting character actress (Betty Faria).
Festival de Gramado 1992 (Brazil)

Nominated for best film.


References


External links
Perfume de Gardênia at IMDb

Peter A. Cohen is the chairman and CEO of Andover National Corporation, a public holding company. He was formerly the chairman and CEO of Cowen Inc., also known as Cowen & Company now TD Cowen. Prior to his current role, Cohen founded Ramius Capital Management in 1994, a $13 billion investment firm, which he merged with Cowen Inc. in 2009. Prior to this, Cohen was the chairman and chief executive officer of Shearson Lehman American Express from 1983 through 1991.


Early life and education
Cohen was born and raised on Long Island, New York. He is of Jewish descent. Cohen graduated from Ohio State University in 1968 and received his MBA from Columbia Business School in 1969.


Career
Cohen began his career on Wall Street at Reynolds & Co., later part of Dean Witter Reynolds and in 1970, joined CBWL-Hayden Stone. In 1973, Cohen was appointed assistant to the firm's chairman, Sanford I. Weill, the architect of a major consolidation of brokerage and investment banking firms in the 1960s and 1970s. Cohen would remain with the firm and was integral to its various mergers in the 1970s, including Shearson, Hammill & Co. and Loeb, Rhoades, Hornblower & Co. While there he held various positions including CAO, CFO, COO, chairman and CEO.
In 1978, Cohen left Shearson for one year to work for Edmond Safra at Republic New York Corporation and the Trade Development Bank before returning to Shearson in 1979. Shearson merged with American Express in 1981 at which time Cohen became president and chief operating officer and in 1983 chairman and chief executive officer. At age 36, Cohen was by far the youngest head of a major Wall Street firm. Shearson went on to acquire Lehman Brothers Inc. in 1984 and EF Hutton in 1988. During Cohen's career at Shearson, the firm made 24 acquisitions.
In 1988, Cohen was a key player in the leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco. Cohen and Shearson Lehman supported the company's CEO F. Ross Johnson in a proposed $17 billion buyout. Ultimately, Johnson and Cohen lost their bid for the company and RJR Nabisco was acquired by the private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts. Cohen was portrayed by Peter Riegert in the 1993 film Barbarians at the Gate depicting the RJR Nabisco buyout.
In 1991, Cohen founded the securities and asset management businesses of Republic National Bank of New York. From November 1992 to May 1994, Cohen was vice chairman and a director of Republic New York. In July 1994, he founded an asset management company, Ramius Capital Group, which grew to $13 billion in assets undermanagement by 2008. In 2009, Ramius acquired Cowen and Co., a 100-year-old biotechnology and technology-focused securities firm where Cohen was chairman and CEO until December 2018 and chairman through June 2019.
In 2019, Cohen retired from Cowen to pursue building new businesses and subsequently started three companies: Peter Cohen LLC, a personal holding company that invests in private and public companies; Difesa Capital Management, an arbitrage investment partnership he started with his son, Andrew Cohen; and Andover National Corporation, a holding company created for the purpose of acquiring essential-service companies.
Over his career, Cohen has served on numerous corporate and philanthropic boards including those of American Express, The New York Stock Exchange, Kroll Inc., Olivetti, Linkem S.p.A., Telecom Italia, L-3 Corporation, The New York City Opera, The Mount Sinai Medical Center and the Children's Hearing Institute.  He is currently lead director for Scientific Games, chairman of the board of directors of PolarityTE, a biologics company, and a director of Quadrant Biosciences, a diagnostics company built around epigenetics.  He is also chairman of the American Museum of Finance and a director of the Gift of Life Marrow Foundation.


Personal life
Cohen has been married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce. He is married to former flight attendant Brooke Goodman; they have a daughter.


References

Sir Peter Courtenay (1346–1405) was a soldier, knight of the shire, Chamberlain to King Richard II and a famous jouster. His principal seat was Hardington Mandeville, Somerset.


Biography
He was the fifth son of Hugh de Courtenay, 2nd Earl of Devon (1303–1377) by his wife Margaret de Bohun (died 1391). He had several highly prominent elder brothers, but was the most flamboyant of them all: 

Sir Hugh Courtenay, KG, (1326–1349).
Thomas Courtenay, Prebendary of Cutton, cleric.
Sir Edward Courtenay (1329–1372). Born at Haccombe, Devon. He was an ancestor of Edward Courtenay, 1st Earl of Devon (1485 creation) (died 1509).
Robert Courtenay of Moreton
William Courtenay (1342–1396), Archbishop of Canterbury.
Sir Philip Courtenay (c.1345–1406) of Powderham.
Courtenay was knighted by the Black Prince after the Battle of Najera in 1367, at the same time as his brother Sir Philip. In 1378 whilst on a naval expedition with his brother Sir Philip, under the command of Richard FitzAlan, 11th Earl of Arundel and William de Montacute, 2nd Earl of Salisbury, the fleet was attacked by Spaniards off the coast of Brittany and Sir Peter and his brother were captured. His ransom was paid by two wealthy burgesses of Bristol.

Courtenay married Margaret Clyvedon, daughter of John de Clyvedon by his wife Elizabeth. He died on 2 February 1405 and was buried in Exeter Cathedral, where his monumental brass, much worn-away, exists set into a slab in the floor of the south aisle. It was reported by Lysons in 1822 as being then situated further to the west in or near the now demolished Courtenay chantry chapel, near to the chest tomb of his parents, which has also been moved.  He is shown full-length, in armour, with hands together in prayer. His figure is surrounded by a ledger line on which was formerly visible the following inscribed Latin verse, transcribed by John Prince in his Worthies of Devon:

Prince included the following English translation:


References

Peter Shaver (September 27, 1776 – June 21, 1866) was a farmer, businessman and political figure in Upper Canada.
He was born in Montgomery County, New York in 1776, the son of a German immigrant (the family name was originally spelled Schaeffer). His father was a loyalist who served with the British forces during the American Revolution and settled in Matilda Township in Dundas County, Upper Canada after the war.
Peter served as a Private with the Dundas County Militia during the War of 1812 and then raised and commanded the Dundas Cavalry Troop from 1822-1840, including during the Upper Canada Rebellion. He later reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel and commanded the 3rd Battalion, Dundas Militia from 1846-1850s.
He was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Upper Canada in 1820 for Dundas and was reelected in 1828 and served until 1841. He was appointed justice of the peace in the Eastern District in 1825. Shaver farmed and was also involved in the timber trade.
He died in Iroquois in 1866.


References
Becoming Prominent: Leadership in Upper Canada, 1791-1841, J.K. Johnson (1989)

Pietà is a 1571-1576 painting by El Greco, produced just after his arrival in Rome and with clear influence from Michelangelo, although the triangular composition is El Greco's own invention. In the background is a landscape scene. It is now in the Hispanic Society of America.


References


See also
List of works by El Greco


Bibliography
(in Spanish) ÁLVAREZ LOPERA, José, El Greco, Madrid, Arlanza, 2005, Biblioteca «Descubrir el Arte», (colección «Grandes maestros»). ISBN 84-9550-344-1.
(in Spanish) SCHOLZ-HÄNSEL, Michael, El Greco, Colonia, Taschen, 2003. ISBN 978-3-8228-3173-1.


External links
"Catalogue entry".
(in Spanish) "Article on Artehistoria" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2012-02-19.

Pisciglobus is a Gram-positive, facultatively anaerobic, non-spore-forming and non-motile genus of bacteria from the family of Carnobacteriaceae with one known species (Pisciglobus halotolerans). Pisciglobus halotolerans has been isolated from fish sauce from Thailand.


References

Political Rowdy is a 2005 Indian Telugu-language film directed by Adi Narayana. The film stars Mohan Babu, Charmme Kaur, Prakash Raj, and Abbas. Mohan Babu, apart from starring in a lead role, also produced the film. The film is a remake of the Tamil movie Adi Thadi.


Plot
Vithal (Mohan Babu) is a feared gangster who is unmarried at age 45 due his contempt for women. Kaveri (Charmme Kaur) is a college student who seduces Vithal to the point of him falling in love with her. However, she is in love with another man (Abbas) and only seduced him for fun. When Vithal proposes to her, she accepts out of fear. 


Cast


Soundtrack

The film's music was composed by Sandeep Chowta.


References


External links
Political Rowdy at IMDb

The Polysynodial System, Polysynodial Regime (Spanish: régimen polisinodial) or System of Councils was the way of organization of the composite monarchy ruled by the Catholic Monarchs and the Spanish Habsburgs, which entrusted the central administration in a group of collegiate bodies (councils) already existing or created ex novo. Most of the councils were formed by lawyers trained in academic study of Roman law. After its creation in 1521 (and 1526 revamp), the Council of State, chaired by the monarch and formed by the high nobility and clergy, became the supreme body of the monarchy. The polysynodial system met its demise in the early 18th century in the wake of the promulgation of the Nueva Planta decrees by the incoming Bourbon dynasty, which organized a system underpinned by Secretaries of State.


Organization
Its origin goes back to the Middle Ages in the consultative bodies of the crowns of Castile, Aragon and Navarre. The basic mechanism of operation was the elevation of a consultation to the monarch, who resolved according to their opinion.
The councils were of three types:

Councils that had a sphere of competence throughout the territory of the monarch, with the indifference of the kingdom: the Council of State, the highest advisory body presided over by the President of the Royal Council of Castile, the Inquisitor general and the members of the Council of War, which was the second advisory body, and the Council of the Inquisition.
Councils with powers of government in certain territories: Royal Council of Castile - and within this, by reason of the matter, were the Council of Military Orders, the Council of Crusade and the Council of Finance, Council of Aragon, Council of Navarre, Council of the Indies, Council of Italy, Council of Flanders, and during the Iberian Union, the Council of Portugal. By order of hierarchy, those of Castile and Aragon were, in that order, the pre-eminent ones, the kingdoms of the Catholic Monarchs, with the Council of the Indies having great importance because of the extent and wealth of its territories in the New World and the Philippines.
Councils were the Boards, of less important character and, in general, created for specific and fixed term matters.


Councils of Spain


Council of State

(Spanish: Consejo de Estado) 
Established under Charles V, the Council of State did not have specific areas of focus or competences, nor territorial scopes determined by what was supraterritorial, which was the reason why the most important subjects and of foreign policy, as well as the subjects relative to the monarch and to the royal family. It was established in 1526 when Suleiman the Magnificent threatened Austria.
It was the only Council that did not have a president, since it was the monarch who assumed that function. His advisors were not specialists in legal matters but in international relations, like the Duke of Alba or Granvela. The councilors were, therefore, members of the high nobility and the high clergy. Its mission was to advise the monarch on foreign policy and had control of the embassies of Rome, Vienna, Venice, Genoa, and the major powers of Europe: France, England and Portugal.
Unlike the Council of Castile, in which the monarch listened to the councilors and executed the conclusions they presented, in the Council of State it was the monarch himself who exposed the points to be discussed, listened to the counselors and, subsequently, made decisions.
Related to the Council of State was the Council of War, they had the same members, except that the Council of War had specific advisers, and the matters they were in charge of everything related to the armies, equipment, appointments, war planning and last judicial instance.


Council of Finance
(Spanish: Consejo de Hacienda) 
Established under Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, the creation of the Council of Finance (Hacienda) in 1523 was a remarkable rationalization of the Castilian treasury, which until then had two accounts that were continually facing each other (the Major Account, responsible for the collection of taxes and their administration, and Accounts, which was responsible for intervening and verifying the accounts of the previous one).
This council consisted of three counselors, normally university graduates with experience in the bureaucracy of the Court and four assistants (Treasurer, finance clerk, accountant and secretary), to decide on matters of the Royal Treasury, were adopted by the full Council or by its three most important courts: the Court of Millions, the Court of Oidores and the Accounts Accountant. Their competences included collecting taxes, administrating them and ensuring that their collection was fulfilled; Executing expenses, proposing new funding sources, proposing budgets and requesting reports from accountants (something like the current accountants) of the other Councils. This Council was characterized by the continuous friction with the other Councils, aggravated by the fact that the members of the Finance Council were rarely of important families, unlike the rest of the Councils.


Council of Inquisition
 
(Spanish: Consejo de la Suprema Inquisición) 
Established during the Catholic Monarchs, it had jurisdiction of the Council of the Inquisition extended beyond the limits of Castile and the Indies, encompassing the kingdoms of Aragon with the exception of Naples, and Navarre, but not Portugal, nor Milan, nor the Burgundian territories. It was composed of a president (the inquisitor general) and six councilors (the apostolic inquisitors). Its original function was to resolve issues of appeal, but it also became involved in the proceedings initiated by the local courts.


Council of  Castile

It was the most prestigious in importance after the sovereign. The number of members varied with time, in it representatives of the main noble houses of Castile, two or three ecclesiastics, and a variable number of university-trained men met. Its main functions were the government of the kingdom of Castile, as well as the administration of justice, following the work of 'court of appeal.' In fact, this second function was the most common.


Council of Aragon

Established during the Catholic Monarchs, the council had jurisdiction over the territories of the crown of Aragon: Aragon, Catalonia, Valencia, Majorca and Sardinia, with the exception of Naples and Sicily, which in 1556 were transferred to the new Council of Italy. Its function was to decide in conflicts of jurisprudence between the Crown and the special privileges (fueros). It was composed of a vice chancellor (president), a general treasurer, nine councilors and a notary. As the council presided over territories, it worked in a similar way to that of Castille only in regards to Mallorca and Sardinia.


Council of Portugal

Under Philip II of Spain the Council of Portugal was established in 1582, composed of one president and six, then four councilors. He was in charge of the affairs of the kingdom of Portugal in the administration of justice, appointment of ecclesiastical offices, appointment of officers and economy. With the Portuguese Restoration, in 1640, the Council continued to exist, since Philip IV did not recognize the independence of Portugal, taking charge of the Portuguese faithful to the Spanish monarch and the government of Ceuta, 2 until it was dissolved after the Treaty of Lisbon (1668).


Council of Italy

It was established under Philip II in 1556 when Italian affairs were under the jurisdiction of the Council of Aragon. It was responsible for justice, finances, the appointment of officials and the viceroys in the former Italian possessions of the Crown of Aragon (Naples and Sicily). Subsequently, the affairs of the State of Milan were added. It was formed by a president and 6 regents: two for the kingdom of Naples, two for Sicily and two for Milan. Each territory had a Spanish and an Italian ruler.


Council of Flanders

Its function was the appointment of posts, the administration of justice and finance in the Netherlands and in Burgundy. It had a president and a variable number of directors.


Council of the Indies

Established in 1524 under Charles V, the council was composed of a president, a great chancellor, twelve advisers, specific posts like those of the official Chronicler of the Indies, Cosmographer and a judge of the House of Trade, which was also Superintendent of the Compilation of the Laws of the Indies, and four officers.
As for its powers, it had supreme jurisdiction in all matters relating to the sea and land of the New World, in the military and the political, in peace and in war, in civil and criminal matters; supervised the operation of the House of Trade, in Seville; he proposed the posts of viceroys, generals of navies and fleets, archbishoprics and bishoprics in the Indies; it was the court of appeal and regulated the matters of ecclesiastical matter according to the royal patronage.


Council of the Crusade
(Spanish: Consejo de Cruzada) 
The Crusade Council, initially, was created to administer the three bulls granted by the Papacy (crusade, subsidies and toilet) for the defense of the Catholic faith and the war against the infidels. This council, usually formed by ecclesiastics, a president, two councilors of the Council of Castile, a regent of the Council of Aragon and a councilor of the Council of the Indies was responsible for the collection and management of said bulls, which were an important source of funding to the royal coffers.


Council of Military Orders
(Spanish: Consejo Consejo de las Órdenes) 
Established under the Catholic Monarchs, the Council consisted of a president and six councilors. Once King Ferdinand the Catholic obtained from the pope the administration of the entailed estates (mayorazgos) of the Order of Calatrava in 1489, a Council was established for its management. King Ferdinand seized control of the entailed estates of the military Orders of Santiago in 1493, and Alcántara in 1494 (the Order of Montesa would be added in 1587), with which in 1498 the Order Council was established.
Their functions included the appointments, the administration of their possessions, the administration of the justice of the gentlemen of the four Orders, as well as the designation of the same, but it ended up becoming a kind of Court of Honor, a guarantee of purity of blood.


The decline of the system
Since the start of Enlightenment, these institutions would be laid aside because of the creation of the Secretaries of State and Universal Dispatch, which took all the Councils' power. The Councils that survived served as a tool of the King to concentrate and increase his power, and with this going into an absolutist system.
The Councils, many of them distorted with respect to their initial origin, disappeared altogether during the nineteenth century, replacing it at the outset with the figure of the Central Supreme Board recognized by the liberal constituents, being this organ the anteroom of the Council of Ministers created during the reign of Isabella II.


See also

Spanish Empire
Catholic Monarchs
The empire on which the sun never sets


Further reading
Elliott, J.H. Imperial Spain. New York: New American Library 1963.
Haring, Clarence, The Spanish Empire in America. 1947


References

Pomponne de Bellièvre, seigneur de Grignon (1529 – 7 or 9 September 1607) was a French statesman, chancellor of France (1599–1605).


Life
Bellièvre was born in Lyon in 1529.
Between 1575 and 1588, Bellièvre accepted more than a dozen diplomatic missions for King Henry III of France (1551–1589). Sometimes he negotiated with foreign rulers, such as Elizabeth I of England, but more often with domestic antagonists, such as Henry of Navarre and his Huguenots, Henry I, Duke of Guise, and the Catholic Leaguers, and Francis, Duke of Anjou and his allies in the Low Countries. In the course of these missions Bellievre corresponded copiously with Henry III, and Bellievre also discussed them with his ministerial colleagues, often stating frankly to colleagues his discomfort with King Henry's decisions. With the king himself, he expressed his doubts more cautiously.
Pomponne de Bellièvre was sent to London in November 1586 by Henry III and Catherine de' Medici to try to persuade Elizabeth I not to execute Mary, Queen of Scots. Elizabeth rejected the arguments presented by Bellièvre, and insisted that because Mary was in England she was subordinate to her rule and justice.


Farewell to Henry III
As King Henry III lay dying in 1589, Bellièvre pronounced a devastating commentary on the royal master he had served: "If kings are good, we must preserve them; if they are bad, we must endure them. God sends one or the other to punish or console His people."


Assembly of Notables
In 1596, Bellièvre led the charge for the convocation of an Assembly of Notables to address the kingdoms financial problems. The Assembly would largely endorse his program, however in 1597 he quickly found himself supplanted by the baron de Rosny.


References
Babelon, Jean-Pierre (2009). Henri IV. Fayard.
Knecht, Robert (1996). The Rise and Fall of Renaissance France. Fontana Press.
Major, J. Russell (1974). "Bellièvre, Sully, and the Assembly of Notables of 1596". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 64 2.
Poncet, Olivier, Pomponne de Bellièvre (1529–1607) Un homme d’État au temps des guerres de religion (Paris: École des chartes, 1999)


Notes


External links
 Media related to Pomponne de Bellièvre at Wikimedia Commons

Potamonautes lividus, also known as the blue river crab, is a species of decapod in the family Potamonautidae. P. lividus is endemic to the country of South Africa in an area of 200 kilometers squared. The species prefers inland freshwater bodies in wetlands, bogs, marshes, freshwater swamp forests and peatlands (mire). P. livisus is found most often in the province Kwa-Zulu Natal in South Africa with the species also living in Richards bay, Ntambanana, Mtubatuba and unconfirmed sighting in the Amatikulu river which if confirmed, represents the southernmost members of the Potamonautes lividus species.
The IUCN conservation status of Potamonautes lividus is "VU" or vulnerable. The species faces a high risk of endangerment in the medium term due to residential development and commercial development of its habitat. Humans damming and modification of their freshwater wetlands, bogs, marshes and peatlands (mires) habitats also contribute to their declining.


References

Powerpet [ పవర్ పేట ] is a suburb of Eluru city. It is located in the II-town area Police Jurisdiction of the city. An underpass is constructed below the railway line to connect Powerpet with RR Peta Area.


History
Between 1893 and 1896, 1,288 km (800 mi) of the East Coast State Railway, between Vijayawada and Cuttack, was opened for Freight & Civilian traffic and Halt Station was Constructed. It is named after British railway engineer Sir Power in memory of his contribution to the locality's development of suburb.


Demographics
There are a total population of 10,000 people living in 2,000 houses in Powerpet.


Transport
Many Arterial roads passes through Powerpet. Eluru Old bus station is situated in this locality. Chennai-Kolkata National railway line divides Powerpet from 1-Town. Powerpet railway station provides railway connectivity to this region.


Places of worship
Sri Kashi Annapurna Sametha Visweshwara Swamy Vari Temple
Sri Vasudevalayam


References

The pre-Columbian history of Costa Rica extends from the establishment of the first settlers until the arrival of Christopher Columbus to the Americas.
Archaeological evidence allows us to date the arrival of the first humans to Costa Rica to between 7000 and 10,000 BC. By the second millennium BC sedentary farming communities already existed. Between 300 BC and AD 300 many communities moved from a tribal, clan-centric organization – kinship-based, rarely hierarchical and dependent on self-sustenance – to a hierarchical one, with caciques (chiefs), religious leaders or shamans, artisan specialists and so on. This social organization arose from the need to organize manufacture and trade, manage relations with other communities and plan offensive and defensive activities. These groups established broader territorial divisions to produce more food and control wider sources of raw materials.
From the 9th century certain villages grew in size, and the latter-period chiefdoms of the 16th century came to develop greater social hierarchies and major improvements in infrastructure.


Ancient history


First settlers
The presence of humans in the Americas was a much later phenomenon than on other continents. The first humans are barely dated to around 40,000 to 50,000 BC, and it is suggested a later date. In any case, the concentration of ice over the continents during the last Ice Age caused the oceans to recede by about 120 meters (400 feet), allowing groups of hunters from northeast Asia to move eastward in pursuit of great herds of animals. They traveled to North America and settled there in several waves, and over the course of several millennia and through successive generations, the descendants of these hunters spread out throughout the Americas and her neighboring islands.
There is archaeological evidence that places the arrival of the first humans to Costa Rica between 7,000 and 10,000 BC. In the valley of Turrialba sites have been found in areas where quarry and tradesman tools such as bifaces were manufactured. It is thought that these first settlers of Costa Rica belonged to small nomadic groups of around 20 to 30 members bound by kinship, which moved continually to hunt animals and gather roots and wild plants. In addition to the species that still exist today, their usual prey animals included the so-called mega-fauna such as giant armadillos, sloths and mastodons.


Mesolithic Period
Around 8000 BC climatic changes brought about the end of the last Ice Age. The increase in temperature caused substantial changes in vegetation and saw the extinction of the mega-fauna, through either the disappearance of the plants they consumed, excessive predation by hunter or a combination of both. The hunter-gatherers had to develop strategies to adapt to new conditions, and they continued by hunting smaller species such as tapirs, collared peccary and deer. The new wealth of tropical vegetation, moreover, helped them to survive through all times of year.
It is thought that human groups remained small, about 30 to 100 members, organized in nomadic or semi-nomadic bands devoted to hunting and gathering. However, the knowledge of the local environment allowed them to plan their travels through different areas based on the periodic ripening of certain fruits and the growth of familiar plants (that would later form the basis of agriculture) as well as the availability of other resources. Along these familiar paths they could find temporary shelter under rock ledges, or establish outdoor camps with tapavientos (windbreaker walls based on the cipresillo tree) or other temporary structures.
Tradesman work areas, campfire pits and other fragmentary evidence of life in these groups have been found in the Turrialba valley and in various spots around Guanacaste. The manufacturing of specialized tools for various activities continued, and artifacts from this era such as scrapers, knives and spear tips display differences in form and size relative to those of the mega-fauna hunters.


Neolithic Period
By 5000 BC it became common to farm tubers and corn, as well as cultivate fruit trees and palm trees. Agriculture emerged slowly, stemming from knowledge of the annual cycles of nature and the progressive domestication of familiar plants. This development occurred over thousands of years and coexisted with traditional hunting and gathering, but it afforded a certain amount of stability. To ensure subsistence of these groups there had to exist forms of collective work and property, as well as egalitarian relationships.
Between 2000 BC and 300 BC, some communities of early farmers became egalitarian societies. The development of agriculture prompted changes in the relationship between humans and nature, and allowed them to feed many more people. Furthermore, the ever-growing dependence on agriculture compelled human groups to establish permanent settlements around agricultural fields. This led to stable villages of huts that had to be erected in clear areas of the forest. The agricultural system most likely employed was slash-and-burn: The forest would be cut with stone axes and spades then burned to prepare it for planting crops. Agricultural practices included vegeculture, semiculture or a combination of both.
Vegeculture (cultivation of plants on stakes) came about by farming tubers (yucas, yams, sweet potatoes) and diverse palms and trees (avocados, nances), in combination with hunting and fishing. This activity was very stable, since it demanded few nutrients from the soil, rarely caused erosion and could be developed in hilly areas. By such means, societies based on vegeculture would change very slowly.
In contrast to vegeculture, semiculture (cultivation of plants from seeds) had a greater effect on the environment, because it required more nutrients from the soil and caused greater erosion. In return, this system had a big advantage: it make food easier to store so that it could be made available all year, not just around harvest time. This led to larger societies where functions would be diversified. The primary semicultural activity was the production of corn, as well as associated plants such as beans and ayotes (a type of gourd related to the pumpkin).
Throughout the 2nd millennium BC there existed in Costa Rica small, disperse villages, non-nomadic agricultural communities that used ceramic bowls and utensils, and tools made from wood, bone and stone for agricultural tasks and food preparation. The oldest of these agricultural village communities (2000–500 BC) has been found in the province of Guanacaste. More recent ones (1500–300 BC) have been discovered in the Turrialba Valley, the coastal region of Gandoca, the northern plains, Sarapiquí Basin, Barva, Herradura, the Térraba River Basin, the Coto Colorado River Basin and Isla del Caño.


Societal evolution


Egalitarian societies
In the beginning, the social organization of these groups would've been of a tribal or clan-based nature, with egalitarian relationships between individuals and organizations, in clans or groups whose members were or would consider themselves to be descended from a common ancestry. Such ties would have served as a foundation for economic and political relations; the leadership would've been informal and ownership of goods would've been collective. However, agriculture, sendentarism and a broadening demographic would've prompted the formation of higher classes of society, and the advent of leaders who built organizations well-suited to manage food production and distribution, calm disputes and so on. Important figures such as the shaman (a kind of priest), physician and witch doctor would have overseen religious and spiritual life.


Early chiefdoms
With dependency on agriculture came the need for efficient territorial control, to ensure the availability of suitable farmlands and improvement of productive techniques. Soil depletion and the consequent necessity to rotate crops, as well as a steady increase in the population, also made it essential to expand a group's sphere of territorial dominance. Almost inevitably, this brought about the rise of armed conflict with other groups.
Between 300 BC and 300 AD, many villager-egalitarian communities in Costa Rica moved from a tribal, clan-centric organization – kinship-based, rarely hierarchical and dependent on self-sustenance – to a villager-chief organization, with chiefs and elders, religious leaders or shamans, specialist artisans, people of hereditary power and so on. These chiefdoms likely arose from the need to organize production and trade, manage relations with other communities and plan offensive and defensive initiatives.
These chiefdom groups in general established territorial divisions that were more strongly demarcated than those in tribal times, and were able to expand their geographical spheres of domination to produce more food and control expanding sources of raw materials (forests, quarries, etc.). These groups also developed trading networks with other communities and regions.
Other villages grew and became centers of economic, political and religious power. Some studies refer to these new forms of organization as complex chiefdoms. The appearance of these types of chiefdoms also led to higher-level hierarchies, with principal villages and secondary towns. From around 300 BC there began to appear large villages with intrastructural works of various importance (foundations, roads and burial mounds), that indicate a certain centralization of authority and managerial capacity to mobilize communities for construction tasks. There might emerge a primary chief in the dominant village and as well as secondary chiefs in subordinate villages. Among the principal archaeological testaments to this era, it is fitting to mention diverse housing sites in the Nicoya Peninsula, housing structures at the sites of Severo Ledesma and Las Mercedes – and on the Atlantic side, other settlement ruins in Valle del General, as well as the Coto Brus, Coto Colorado and Térraba River basin.
Several archaeological sites in Guanacaste Province are linked to this period, particularly tombs covered in tons of stone. Similar funeral mounds have appeared in the canton of Grecia. In other places in the Costa Rican Central Valley and along the Pacific, archaeologists have uncovered housing plots delimited with rounded edges, mounds, clay floors and roads. In the south Pacific region are the famous stone spheres of Costa Rica, whose purpose is still a mystery, though it is suggested that they may have been symbols of rank or territorial markers, or had an astronomical function associated with cycles of agriculture.
There was a great development in the manufacture of objects made of jadeite or so-called "social" jade (green or off-white stones such as quartz, chalcedony, opal, serpentine, etc.). It is supposed that they were used as personal ornaments then later on in individual burial clothes, since most have been found at burial sites. Deep local tradition in jade-work (which began around 500 BC and continued until around AD 700 for the most part developed without external influence, although some pieces display features of Olmec and Mayan artisanship. Their motifs apparently had religious meaning. Burials from this period demonstrate the existence of rank and class, since burial offerings include artifacts made of jade and other green gemstones, ceremonial grinding stones, sceptre stones and elaborate ceramics. The number, quality and difficulty of obtaining these articles are a means of indicating the person's social rank.
With the advances in agriculture and corresponding social changes, the most successful communities established social hierarchies based on economic and political criteria. Between AD 300 and 800, these chiefdom societies developmented internal social strata, with political and religious leaders, warriors, specialized artisans and farmers. The ruling class could fill functions such as distributors for communally produced goods, military leaders, crisis counselors and so on. In any case, they usually had access to goods that were especially valuable because they were difficult to obtain or manufacture; and they were distinguished from other natives by their prominent living quarters within the villages, as well as the more elaborate funeral rites and offerings their status afforded.


Later chiefdoms
From the 9th century certain villages grew in size and their internal design became more complex, giving rise to the era of late pre-Columbian chiefdoms which lasted until the 16th century. It is possible that more fruitful varieties of corn and other crops, as well as more perfected agricultural methods coincided with an increase in population, a deeper social hierarchy and stronger relationships between communities further down the social chain. In some villages the caciques or shamans promoted the infrastructure improvements that required the mobilization of immense work forces. There was a notable peak in the art of goldsmithing throughout the country. In addition there was an increase in the variety of domestic and personal goods, regional trade, alliances and territorial conflicts.
At the start of this period, Mesoamerican cultural groups began to trickle over the Nicoya Peninsula, principally the Chorotega people, who subordinated, displaced or mixed with populations that had previously settled in the Nicoyan territory. These new peoples introduced changes in religion, burial rites, art and other aspects of life; as well as new domesticated animals such as turkeys. This period corresponds to habitation sites located in coastal valleys such as Nacascolo and Papagayo; and the flood plains of the Tempisque River and other important rivers. In addition there were other places that specialized in the salt extraction, providing a precious trading commodity, especially for groups that lived inland. Skill in multi-colored ceramic art reached an advanced level; new colors and styles became available to local ceramic artisans, clearly inspired by Mesoamericana.
In the heart of Costa Rica populations became more concentrated in organized economic and political centers, that would form living and ceremonial groups.  The most well-known archaeological site of this kind is Guayabo in Turrialba, which contains raised mounds with walls of stone, access ramps and pedestals, as well as aqueducts, elevated platforms, circular and rectangular foundations, paved walkways and other structures. But others have been found in widespread places in the Central Valley, the Caribbean region and the northern plains. In this era there was a great development in stonework with volcanic rocks, to make tables, stone tablets, grinding stones and anthropomorphic figures (women, heads, shamans, warriors and so forth).
In the south Pacific region have also been found great quantities of home foundations, roads, dump sites, plus funeral areas and mounds. These settlements were located in very fertile regions, bringing about the extensive cultivation of corn and cotton, and the use of palm trees (coyoles and royal palms) and fruit trees (guapinoles, nances, etc.). This was the height of sphere-making, as well as of stone artisanship in such works as animal figures, grindstones, grand anthropomorphic statues (which appear to represent important social figures) that featured smooth surfaces. There was an increase in goldsmithing with guanín (low-grade gold) and tumbaga (gold and copper alloy) using hammering and thin-sheet techniques. Mineral deposits themselves were not exploited, as gold was extracted from rivers and copper from outcrops.


Societal classification
When the Europeans arrived, Costa Rica was not a unified land but was inhabited by diverse peoples independent from each other, and whose respective cultures had many different levels of complexity and development. The traditional view that divides this territory between the Chorotegas, Huetars and Bruncas has been abandoned, since these names in fact only identified a small part of the nations that existed in Costa Rican proper at the time. In light of recent studies, it has become much more appropriate to identify two major principal areas:

The Intermediate Area (or Isthmo-Colombian Area), with Caribbean and South American influences
The Mesoamerican Area, a great cultural expanse that extends from Chiapas and the Yucatán Peninsula in present-day Mexico to the Nicoya Peninsula as well as its eponymous gulf
There is no strict boundary, either cultural or political, between the Intermediate and Mesoamerican Areas, because there would've been frequent contact and transcultural exchange between both groups of people, over all the confluent areas. Even so, notable culture differences existed between them. Some peoples in the Mesoamerican Area, for example, were organized into societies that appear more complex than those of their contemporaries in the Intermediate Area, having legal institutions which, from a Western point of view, may have been more developed. On the other hand, in both regions it appears the prevalent system of law was exclusively or almost exclusively consuetudinary, based on custom rather than the rule of law. It is possible, however, that the indigenous Nicoyans preserved their legal codes by means of some writing system similar to those of other Mesoamerican cultures.
Part of what is known about these societies is from reports and letters written by the Spanish conquistadors and missionaries, people whose training and mentality were borne of cultural norms very different from those of the indigenous societies, and whose view of them at times was distorted through prejudice, personal interest or mere ignorance. Such documents are not very numerous, and on occasion are superficial, fragmentary or very general; and talk about a very small number of the indigenous groups that existed.


Mesoamerican Area
In the opening decades of the 16th century, most of the people inhabiting the Nicoya Peninsula and the vicinity of its eponymous gulf belonged to the Mesoamerican cultural area. Their presence has also been attested in the central Pacific region between the Jesús María and Tárcoles Rivers. These people spoke Chorotega, and this is why sometimes they are generically designated as such. Furthermore, in the vicinity of modern-day Bagaces, at the mouth of the San Juan River and the Sixaola River basin there were enclaves of groups with Mexican cultural roots who spoke Náhuatl. According to several documents from the second half of the 16th century, the Nahua colony in Sixaola had been founded by tributary groups sent by the Aztec emperor Moctezuma II, who were driven there during the Spanish conquest of Tenochtitlán and decided to stay there.
The Nicoya Peninsula and gulf region were the first Costa Rican territories to definitively and lastingly submit to the dominion of the Crown of Castile, around 1520. The interest in these areas was strengthened by the erroneous assumption that it would allow communication between the gulf and Lake Nicaragua, and beginning in 1522 there was constant Castilian presence in the region.
Much of the knowledge known regarding the life of this region's inhabitants is derived from the chronicles of Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés, whose Historia general y natural de las Indias (1535) includes details from his meetings with the Nicoyan people in 1529. It is possible that many of their institutions and customs were similar to those of the Chorotegan indigenous communities that at the time inhabited the Nicaraguan side of the Pacific. Details of the latter, among those regions administered by friar Francisco de Bobadilla, were more numerously recorded by Fernández de Oviedo and other conquistadors as well as a few priests.
The population of Nicoya was a political, religious and economic center, located a short distance from the modern-day city of this name. (In the middle of the 16th century, there were two other dependencies also known as Nicoya, one larger than the other.) In Nicoya would reside a high chief, who held that post for life and exercised political authority, and would carry out religious and ceremonial functions. It appears that there was prevalently a dynasty-elective system for chief succession. Fernández de Oviedo indicated that this priest had other principal vassals and horseman called galpones, who would accompany him and protect him, and be his court subjects and captains. It is possible that these elders, whom the chronicler describes as arrogant and cruel, represented the various tributary villages of Nicoya.
Fray Juan de Torquemada wrote that the Chorotegan villages in the Gulf of Nicoya area organized themselves into four "provinces": two within the peninsula, Nicoya and Cantrén (Canjel); and two others on the west coast, Orotiña y Chorotega. Other sources mention Canjén, Diriá, Nacaome, Namiapí, Nicopasaya, Papagayo, Paro and Zapandí, as well as the island of Pococi (today known as Isla Caballo).


Social organization
The Chorotega society was hierarchical, and in the upper social strata appeared chieftains, warriors, priests and elders of prestige known as huehues. The authority of the village chieftains was not absolute, since they shared it with the monéxico, a council of huehues elected monthly and in which there were possibly representatives of various clans and communities. The members of the monéxico were perhaps the same individuals previously mentioned as galpones – since the buildings where the council met were known by that name (surely derived from the term "calpulli") – that were assigned to a neighborhood, village or district among the indigenous people of Mexico. Fernández de Oviedo wrote:

Among the other customary things of these people, one appears just and honest to us, such as when the chieftains are to provide for their armies and warfare, or when they are to present themselves to the Christians or agree to an extraordinary expense. And it is when the chieftain and his principals enter into their monéxico or council, and bestow fortune (after agreeing to what is to be given) to which of them is to remain in the office of provision or of distribution to all citizens, and to make them expand the way that the monéxico was ordered. The governors and officials who are to attend with the chieftain or president in the monéxico are elected by fours for four moons, and those completed, become like any other citizens, and others server in kind; but [the duty of office] is always done by the huehues, that is, the most principal elders.
In some communities, the monéxico had the legal authority to elect or bring death to the chieftain or principal ruler. On the Chorotegan community of Nagrando (Nicaragua), Fernández de Oviedo wrote:

It was not governed by a chieftain or sole elder, but rather in a communal manner by a certain number of elders elected by vote; and those same would affect a captain general for affairs of war, and after he with the others ruled their state when one died or was killed in a battle or confrontation, they would elect another, and sometimes those same would kill each other if one were found to be an inconvenience to the republic.
For his part, the chronicler Francisco López de Gómara indicates:

[Between the indigenous peoples of Nicaragua] there could not be a committee or council, especially in warfare, without the chieftain or captain of the republic and assumptive village. They declare war over borders or boundary markers, over hunting and who is better and more powerful. It is like this everywhere until they capture men for sacrifice. Each chief has for his people a special sign in war and even at home. The free towns elect a captain general who is the most skillful and expert they find, who rules and punishes absolutely and without appeal to the elders.
It is possible that in Nicoya there existed a similar system. In each case, the governor had limited authority and needed to take into account the traditions and opinions of the community. In 1529, when Fernández de Oviedo recommended to Nambí, chieftain of Nicoya, that he put an end to certain rites of collective drunkenness, he received the following response:

... that in the case of the drunken women, he saw that it was bad; but that such was the custom and of their past, and that if it wasn't done the people would not love him well and would hold him in poor conversation, and that he would depart from them from the land.
The monéxico also had the right to elect certain elders of prestige as counselors to the community. These elders, whose activities the Spaniards compared to the Christian confessional, had private consultations, made recommendations to someone who sought his help, and allotted such penances as sweeping the plazas or gathering firewood for the temples. Counselors who divulged the content of these consultations, and third parties who listened to them surreptitiously, were severely punished. These counselors, in contrast to custom among the priests, remained permanently unmarried.


Laws
It is not clear if the monéxico also had judicial functions. In his work Costa Rica, la frontera sur de Mesoamérica (Costa Rica, the southern border of Mesoamerica), the lawyer and anthropologist Ricardo Quesada López-Calleja indicates that the chieftain would name experienced and capable elders as judges, whose rulings could not be appealed. Quesada also notes that in the case of bigamy, the counselor would dictate the sentence.
The available data regarding the normative organization of the Chorotegan people indicate that from the point of view of Western jurisprudence, it was a system of minimal complexity based on precedence, with minor infractions and few sanctions. On the other hand, it is very possible that they had written norms. The chronicler Antonio de Herrera states that the Chorotegan peoples of Nicaragua had voluminous books of paper and parchment, where they recorded memorable facts and had their laws and rites depicted. Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés indicated that they possessed books of deerskin, where in red and black ink they recorded their deaths and inheritances. So, when there were conflicts or disputes, they could be settled with the opinion of the elders. At the beginning of the 20th century, as a result of a few archaeological excavations on the island of Chira, a square book with hieroglyphics was found that was called el misal chorotega (the Chorotegan missal or prayer book); but it is unknown where this document was used. The sole reference known about this find is offered by the archaeologist María Fernández Le Cappellain de Tinoco, who visited the island of Chira in 1935. In her article, "Chira, olvidada cuna de aguerridas tribus precolombina" (Chira, forgotten cradle of war-hardened pre-Columbian tribes), she relates the account of Fernández Le Cappellain of an islander who said:

Here ... I came accompanied by Father Velazco more than twenty-five years ago, when this gentleman made his expeditions to the island. In a place very near, after five months of expedition, we discovered something very important called the Choretega missal, a square book with many hieroglyphics.
Family ties were very important. The organization of the Chorotegan family was fundamentally cognate or matrilineal. furthermore, according to Fernández de Oviedo, the Chorotega men were "very much commanded by and subject to the will of their women." López de Gómara says they were "valiant, though cruel and very subject to their women". Marriage between blood relatives was prohibited and incest was practically unknown.


Marriage
Marriage was monogamous and appeared indissoluble, except in the case of adultery or bigamy. Some chieftains and high-ranking people had concubines, but they were never considered legitimate wives. Customarily, marriage required a series of ceremonies. It began with the asking for a woman's hand, that was executed by the father of the would-be groom during a formal visit with the woman's parents. If the request was accepted, a date was set for the wedding celebration. The marriage vow was celebrated with great fiestas, to which the families, friends and neighbors of the couple would come. Before the wedding, both bride and bridegroom would receive a dowry from their respective parents, which may have included, in accordance with a family's economic means, arable land, a dwelling, cocoa beans, jewelry, animals, fruits, etc.
Lands and valuable pieces of jewelry were inherited by the couple's children. However, if one of the spouses died without the marriage bearing descendants, these wares would return to the control of the parents. The father had the authority to sell the children for sacrificial rituals.
In Nicoya and Orotiña, the chieftains exercised droit du seigneur (right of the first night) or ius primae noctis upon request from the woman's family, so that it would be easier for her to find a husband. According to López de Gómara, some native peoples of Nicaragua preferred to give their wives-to-be "to the chieftains who would break them, to be honored more or to rid themselves of suspicion or anxiety." When Fernández de Oviedo reprimanded chieftain Nambí for continuing to have several wives and continuing to spend many nights with virgin women despite being baptized, the Nicoyan chief protested:

... that in [the affairs] of women, he did not want more than one, if it were possible; that he would be content with one rather than many; but that his fathers gave their daughters and begged him to take them; and he would take others who looked good to him, and he would be successful by having many sons; and that of the young virgins, he took them to honor them and their relatives, and then the other Indians would be willing to marry them ...
The wedding ceremony was carried out in the presence of the chieftain and the families of the engaged. The chieftain, with his right hand, would take the bride and groom by the middle and little fingers of their left hands, conducted them to a small house designated for carrying out wedding rites and there said to them: "See that you are good spouses and that you look over your estate, and that you always improve it and not let it be spoiled." Afterwards, the couple would observe silence as they watched a sliver of ocote (native pine) burn. When that was consumed, the ceremony would be declared complete and the new husband and wife would retire into a room in the house to consummate the marriage.
Wedding celebrations would start the following day, when the couple came out of the house and the husband announced before his friends and relatives that he had found the woman a virgin. This declaration would give rise to general rejoicing. In the event that the woman had been delivered to the husband-to-be as a virgin, but had already had sexual relations, she was returned to her parents' house and the wedding would be considered invalid. On the other hand, if the husband-to-be had known before the wedding that the woman was not a virgin, the marriage would be considered valid.
Many men preferred to take women who were no longer virgins as spouses, and even those of licentious conduct. Also, references survive regarding a peculiar matrimonial practice of the Nicaraos, that may have also existed between the Chorotegans: A woman would engage in prostitution to obtain a dowry, congregate afterwards with her clients, ask that they build her a house within a certain time period and tell them that each one had to contribute. When the dwelling was finished, the woman would choose a husband from her among her clients, a party would take place and from then on she would be considered a good woman. It should be mentioned that prostitution, even without marriage as an end, was permitted; and Fernández de Oviedo states that the normal price for a woman's sexual services was ten cocoa beans. The chronicler López de Gómara says that the women "before getting married were generally bad, and once married, good."
The Chorotegans also celebrated rites of collective catharsis, sometimes accompanied by human sacrifice and ritual cannibalism. During these rites, married women, as the principals they were, could have sexual relations with whom they wanted or those who paid them, without later being subjected to jealously or punishment. Under normal circumstances, however, a woman's adultery was punished by admonition, severe corporal punishment and expulsion from the home. Their relatives would insult her and not recognize her, and the community would consider her an impure, shameless woman.
Male bigamy was punished by loss of property and exile. His legitimate wife could remarry, if she had no children through bigamy. If there were any, she could not marry again, but if she assumed the care of the children, she would have a right to the property from the bigamous relationship. The woman who married a man with full knowledge of the relationship's bigamous nature lost all of her property in favor of the legitimate wife. Whoever raped a woman was bound to the house where the offense happened, and his own relatives would have to support him until he paid for the crime with a certain amount of property. If he did not meet this obligation, he would become a slave to her family. If a servant had sexual relations with his master's daughter, both would be buried alive. Sexual relations between males were also sentenced to death by stoning.


Economy
As in other indigenous communities of Mesoamerica, ownership of arable land and agricultural work between Chorotegans had to be essentially of a collective nature. Quesada López-Calleja indicates that land could not be sold and that parents conferred it to their children or to their relatives, if they lacked descendants, when they felt that their final hour had arrived. Fernández de Oviedo's references to the Chorotegans' deerskin leather book imply that some type of cadastre existed, though is possible that litigation over lands was not between individuals, but groups.
Individual private property existed mainly with respect to personal property. Thieves were condemned to return stolen items to their rightful owner and to serve their victims to repay the damage, and remained bound to the victim's house until the debt was satisfied. If the victim received no compensation, the thief could remain in slavery. A similar situation could occur whenever a homicide was committed, since the criminal had to pay restitution for the wrongdoing with goods to satisfy the victim's relatives, or otherwise become their slave.
The tianguez or market played a central role in the economic life of the Chorotega towns, for which commerce and labor practices of certain complexity had to exist. These markets were tended by women, men were not permitted to enter, except for young people who had never had sexual relations. Men who violated such prohibitions could be stoned, be sold as slaves or be sold as cannibal fodder. Presiding over the markets were judge-administrators elected once every four months by the monéxico, according to Fernández de Oviedo:

... the first thing one does in the city councils, is determining faithful executors for another four months, who all, or at least one of them, never leaves the plaza and tianguez or market: and those faithful leaders are mayors and absolute governors within those places, to allow sellers neither force nor improper measure, nor giving of less than what was to be given or exchanged in their sales, nor fraud: and they punish without remission some of the transgressors by his decrees and customs, and to strangers they offer courtesy and welcome, because they always come more by their hiring.
Although barter played an important role in trade, Chorotegans used cacao beans as currency. Cases of counterfeiting appeared, where cacao would be extracted from beans and replaced with dirt.


Crime
The religion, language, customs and laws of the Chorotega gradually disappeared as a consequence of the Spanish conquest. Diverse sources from the time of the Spanish domination praise the laws of the Nicoyans and their attitude with regard to the law. For example, in the second half of the 16th century, the cosmographer Juan López de Velasco indicated that the natives of Nicoya were "loyal and obedient to justice", and at the beginning of the 17th century they were still remembered as being ruled by wise laws, that among them there did not exist punishments for patricide, matricide or regicide, because the Nicoyans believed that no person was capable of committing such crimes. The chronicler López de Gómara recounts that among the natives of Nicaragua, which included the Chorotega, "there is no punishment for killing a chieftain, saying that this cannot occur. For his part, Friar Bobadilla reported that when he asked a native of Nicaragua what they did when somebody killed a chieftain, the informant responded that it never happened, "because the chieftain does not communicate with despicable people."


Intermediate Area

In the 16th century, the present-day territory of Costa Rica – with the exception of the Nicoya Peninsula, its eponymous gulf and the Nahuan enclaves – was part of the cultural region known as the Isthmo-Colombian Area, encompassing those territories occupied predominantly by speakers of the Chibchan languages. In addition, this cultural region included eastern El Salvador, eastern Honduras, Caribbean Nicaragua, Panama and northern Colombia. It is possible that in earlier eras, the Nicoyan region had formed part of this area, and that its original settlers had been displaced by Mesoamerican groups arriving from the north.
The Intermediate Area of Costa Rica, upon the arrival of the Spaniards, featured much less cultural unity than the Mesoamerican Area. Numerous communities with different languages and customs lived there, though most languages spoken there belonged to the Macro-Chibcha language family. The culture of some of these groups, especially on the Atlantic side, had many elements similar to those of the Caribbean islands; but in other groups a South American influence was discernible. For example, in 1562 the town hall of the recently founded city of Castillo de Garcimuñoz, located in the Central Valley, wrote to King Philip II that the natives of Costa Rica imitated Peruvian dress and contracting practices. In the 17th century, some natives of Talamanca still preserved the practice of counting numbers of people on ropes with different types of knots, analogous to the use of knotted straps by the Incan empire. Similarities can also be found between the customs of certain communities and those of Panamanian and Colombian native peoples.
There were commercial ties, vassalages and alliances between many of the communities in the Intermediate Area of Costa Rica, but there was no sole authority in the entire territory; rather, a multitude of societies with different levels of complexity. In Spanish documents appear mention of a great number of native groups: Aoyaque, Burica, Cabécar, Catapa, Chome, Corobicí, Coto, Guaymí, Huetar, Pococi, Quepo, Suerre, Tariaca, Térraba, Tice, Turucaca, Urinama, Viceita, Voto. However, references in this regard are too brief and imprecise to clearly identify the various ethnic groups or their specific characteristics. The names of locations and of the chiefs are also problematic, since they sometimes use two or more names for the same place or person, or the same name for a place and a chieftain. It is even suggested that this may have been due to a custom of changing the name of a place whenever a chieftain died, conferring upon it the name of the deceased.
The Europeans took special note of the great linguistic diversity; even today, the indigenous languages that survive in Costa Rica have very different characteristics. There possibly also existed a great multiplicity of codes of conduct. However, the territory of the Intermediate Area was not visited by chroniclers such as Fernández de Oviedo and missionaries such as Bobadilla, and the data that exists regarding these peoples' religious and judicial lives is exceptionally scant, isolated, and fragmentary.
In the 16th century, it appears in the Intermediate Area that a scattered type of settlement prevailed, defined by the existence of hamlets composed of two or three very large, communal ranches, whose inhabitants cultivated the enclosed fields. Some sources indicate that in each dwelling lived "an entire family, clan or lineage." Although in certain places like Guayabo there remain archaeological testaments to the existence of larger settlements, there appears to have been a lesser tendency for communities to urbanize than in the Nicoyan region, perhaps because nomadic and seminomadic cultivation compelled these groups to slowly move around. In contrast to what occurred in other places in Central America, the Spaniards did not manage to find any population center large enough to qualify as a city.


Social organization
The towns in the Intermediate Area were found to be organized in chiefdoms both large and small, and in clans of common heritage. It is known of several groups that they were subordinate to others and paid tribute to their chieftain; on the other hand, it is very problematic to clearly fix the hierarchical line, because documentation is too vague and imprecise about particular aspects, and sometimes uses imprecise terms such cacique mayor and cacique principal (major chieftain and principal chieftain). In other cases it is difficult to determine whether relations between various groups was of subordination or simple alliance. In addition to the term cacique, the conquistadors use synonyms for principal chieftain such as taque, meaning "chief" or "he who rules" in Chibcha; ibux, which could identify brothers or sons of a chieftain, and uri meaning "master's son".
Among the major chiefdoms that have been identified, perhaps one of the most well-known are those of:

Chief Garabito (whose indigenous name was possibly Guar-Abito, "the sentry of Abito"; the Diego de Artieda Chirinos and Uclés agreement [1573] speaks of the province of "Guaravito" instead of Garabito) in the central Pacific region and part of the western section of the Central Valley
Chief El Guarco, whose successor Correque ruled over a territory that extended from the Río Virilla to Aserrí and eastward to Chirripó and Parragua
Both appear to have had an important number of communities and groups under their control. Other chieftains, however, did not have subordinate ties with them.
Although there are indications that certain communities had patrilineal dynastic systems similar to those of the Incas, most chiefdoms in Costa Rica were lifelong and of matrilineal heredity as in other parts of the Intermediate Area. In some communities this system must have been dynastic-elective; it was still this way, for example, in certain indigenous groups of Talamanca in the second half of the 19th century, according to American paleontologist William More Gabb:

The form of government is extremely simple. A family has hererditary right to the chieftainship.... The succession is not practiced in a direct line; rather, upon the death of the chief, the most eligible member of the royal family is elected to fill the vacancy. Often, instead of the son, the selection would fall upon some second cousin of the last chief.... It has been customary that the heir apparent, the future successor, was second in position or vice-chieftain, with little or no authority.
It is known that in some villages a woman could be the chieftain: In 1562, a Spanish captain who visited the Voto community was "well received by an Indian chieftainess of theirs and by her husband who ruled little among them."
The Costa Rican chieftains in the Intermediate Area had greater powers than those of Nicoya; for example, when Correque moved his residence from Ujarrás to Tucurrique, he brought with him many elders and gentlemen along with their sons, "because the place he wanted was settled and nobody contradicted him." Garabito also appears to have enjoyed considerable authority. However, perhaps in other groups the power of the main chieftain over others was not absolute, but was rather exercised in concert with subordinate chieftains. In some communities, the effective authority of the chieftains must've been lesser still, as for example the writings of Gabb in the latter half of the 19th suggest regarding the natives of Talamanca:

In ancient times the chiefs exercised no more than a nominal power over the town. The principal advantages they derive from their position were more of a social than political character. The chief would be brought to the best seat in the house upon entering any home. He would be treated with great luxury and would be offered chocolate, while people of lower class would have to content themselves with chicha (maize liquor). But (in) case of war, the chief would have to defend himself against beatings from long and heavy clubs, as any other ordinary mortal.
In most communities, the chieftain played roles of vital importance. He would channel productive activities, redistribute surpluses, solve internal conflicts and impart justice, manage relationships with other groups and perform functions akin to a priest. His person was almost always sacred; he would carry special clothing and insignias, and would be surrounded by attendants and servants, as in an elaborate protocol. The principal achievements of his life and his funerals were usually characterized by complex, solemn public rites. The social hierarchy depended in many ways on the chieftain's family relations, since a person's rank was determined by how far or close in blood relationship he was to the chieftain.
Warriors and priests typically belong to the upper classes, and also had special clothes and insignias. In some towns, such as those of the Coctus and Cotos, there were female warriors known as biritecas. The Coctu biritecas captured Dulcehe, the sister of the Quepo chieftain Corrohore, who was freed through the intervention of the conquistador Juan Vázquez de Coronado. As a proper name or nickname, "Biriteca" has been freely given to the first lady of the famous chieftain Garabito, as well as the aforementioned Dulcehe, who was later baptized as Doña Inés. Garabito's biographer, Oscar Bákit, points out how absurd these idenfiers were, saying: "Dulcehe was never nicknamed La Biriteca, as such a name would have been an insult to her, since it belonged to the very same women whom she had taken prisoner."
Military confrontations between the groups were frequent, and prisoners of war were sent to ritual sacrifice, even without the habitual cannibalism in Mesoamerican ceremonies. The missionary friar Agustín de Cevallos, when he refers to the many indigenous groups in southwestern Costa Rica in 1610, states that they lived in constant war with each other, because they had to periodically sacrifice some people, "and when they have none, without sacrificing any from their nation, attack those of another [village] and those that they capture are sacrificed; and if they have any left, they sell them to other neighbors for the same." The slaves would also be sacrificed for burial with chieftains or other members of the upper class.


Laws


Marriage
The norms on family and kinship were based on a cognatic system, for which the relationship between a nephew and his maternal uncle was important. The family organization was based on matrilineal clans that were supposed descendants of a common ancestor and that sometimes identified themselves as a group with a common name – for example, one taken from an animal. In certain indigenous groups of what are today the Talamanca, sexual relations between people of the same cognatic group were rigorously prohibited, which imposed requirements of exogamy: the men had to look for a wife in another clan. Violators of this rule were buried alive. A matrilocal system of residence prevailed; in other words, a man had to go away to live in the house of his parents-in-law. As a fiancé or husband, he had to work to contribute to the communal sustenance of his new family; thus young women were considered "as advantageous property to their families." If the husband ever became ill, he would have to return to his parents' house; but if the sickness was caused by sores or lasted too long, or if the man were an idler, the woman would no longer readmit him. They did not recognize kinship through an agnatic line (i.e., via the father) and consequently sexual dealings were irrelevant between two people related by exclusively patrilineal bonds.
In the Intermediate Area the prevalent system of marriage seems to have been syndiasmic, although it is not impossible that in some communities there had been monogamous forms of marriage. Polygamy, as among the Nicoyans, was reserved for chiefs and others in the upper social strata. A document from 1763 indicates:

[between the natives of Talamanca] the men did not get married unless they were at least twenty years of age, but the women, if they were good-looking, were usually married at six or seven years of age; so the women would raise them and care for them as daughters in their company until such time as they became useful. The Indians of respect, had by the rich and by valiant gentlemen among others, had a plurality of women, that commonly were their sisters-in-law, which they would elevate to nobility.
However, in the latter half of the 19th century, many men among the natives of Talamanca would have two or sometimes three wives, and the husband had his choice of a plurality of women.
The word used today in the Bribri language of Talamanca to define marriage, which literally means "united hands," symbolizes how simple the ceremony could be, if there was any. A German missionary stated at even at the start of the 20th century, there remained between these same Bribris a type of marriage with barely any formalities, but in which the mother of the bride played an important role:

The suitor is presented at his fiancée's home.... "I have come to spend the night," he says. "I come for a very important matter." In this way the groom begins. Then the cacao is prepared, shared and drunk plentily. If some neighbor visits, the mother of the bride invites him to stay.... Finally, the mother asks the suitor at an opportune moment what the important matter is, calling him aside. If it is convenient to the mother, she looks for a special large serving gourd that she has stored in her farmhouse, fills it with cacao and delivers it to her daughter so that she can offer it to her fiancé, which he must drink by itself. The following day the groom-to-be returns to his house and the mother of the bride barely talks to her husband about the matter, which very rarely changes their decision. The mother again advises the suitor to come to her house.... The marriage is no longer discussed, as it is considered done.
As with other matrimonial systems, in the Intermediate Area of Costa Rica the wife may have had a position in the family equal or even superior to that of the husband, as demonstrated in the case of the chieftainess of the Votos. She possibly also enjoyed greater sexual freedom than the Chorotegan woman, since groups of the Intermediate Area do not appear to have given importants to virginity and there were women who deliver themselves to those who solicited them. At the end of the 19th century, William More Gabb stated that between the natives of Talamanca, "when puberty arrives, it is the sign that they should get married, at least on the part of the young women.... I am certain that very few kept their virginity until marriage."
As is customary in sindiasmic families, there does not seem to have been a substantial difference between the positions of the male and female in regards to the dissolution of the marriage, as suggested by the customs that the native groups of Talamanca maintained at the end of the 19th century: "No formula is required to enter into marriage and it lasts for however long it is convenient to the husband and wife. In the case of infidelity on the part of the wife, or of undue cruelty on the part of the husband, they can be separated. Sometimes, if the woman becomes unfaithful, the husband whips her severely and perhaps returns her to her family, or the resentful woman abandons him. This separation last for one or two years, or may be definitive; but during that time, either of the parties can enter into new bonds and then the separation is permanent."
There are also indications that sexual relationships and living arrangements between men were permitted. With respect to a group from the Intermediate Area in Panama (which was strongly linked to the Costa Rican portion) Fernández de Oviedo write that homosexuals "are not rejected nor mistreated for it. Such men are not joined with other men without a license to what they have, and if they do, they are killed."


Economy
In the Costa Rican Intermediate Area there must have prevailed collective systems of work and ownership of arable land, though there were positions of privilege for people belong to the upper social strata. No documentational reference has been found regarding the existence of markets, although the accumulation of artifacts in places such as Línea Vieja allow one to suppose that in some places there was very intense commerce. In certain settlements the existence has been confirmed of plazas that could have been utilized for redistribution of goods, as well as for religious rites.


See also
History of Costa Rica
Models of migration to the New World


References

Premeno is a comune (municipality) in the Province of Verbano-Cusio-Ossola in the Italian region Piedmont, located about 130 kilometres (81 mi) northeast of Turin and about 15 kilometres (9 mi) northeast of Verbania. As of 31 December 2004, it had a population of 776 and an area of 7.4 square kilometres (2.9 mi2).
The municipality of Premeno contains the frazioni (subdivisions, mainly villages and hamlets) Esio and Pollino.
Premeno borders the following municipalities: Aurano, Bee, Ghiffa, Intragna, Oggebbio, Vignone.


Demographic evolution


References

On March 17, 2008, in response to the subprime mortgage crisis and the collapse of Bear Stearns, the Federal Reserve announced the creation of a new lending facility, the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF). Eligible borrowers include all financial institutions listed as primary dealers, and the term of the loan is a repurchase agreement, or "repo" loan, whereby the broker dealer sells a security in exchange for funds through the Fed's discount window. The security in question acts as collateral, and the Federal Reserve charges an interest rate equivalent to the Fed's primary credit rate. The facility was intended to improve the ability of broker dealers to access liquidity in the overnight loan market that banks use to meet their reserve requirements.
The creation of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility constitutes the first time in the history of the Federal Reserve that the Fed has lent directly to investment banks, and it reflects the severity of the 2008 financial crisis perceived by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke. Non-bank institutions such as investment banks exist outside the Fed's regulatory structure. A full detail of the nominal value of loans outstanding through the PDCF is available in the Federal Reserve's public balance sheet.
During the first three days the facility was open, an average of $13.3 billion was borrowed daily with $28.8 billion in loans outstanding. Lending activity peaked in the first week of October 2008, averaging around $150 billion daily. The facility closed on February 1, 2010. According to the Federal Reserve, all loans extended under this facility were repaid in full, with interest, in accordance with the terms of the facility. In total, $8.95 trillion in loans were made through the Facility.


Changes to the Facility
On July 30, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced several actions to further increase liquidity, including an extension of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, through January 30, 2009. On September 14, 2008, in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Federal Reserve announced plans to expand the collateral eligible at the PDCF to include all collateral eligible in tri-party repurchase agreements with the major clearing banks. Originally, only investment-grade debt securities were accepted as collateral through the PDCF. On December 2, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced a further extension of the PDCF through April 30, 2009.
On March 17, 2020, the Federal Reserve reopened the PDCF in order to limit the economic impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. 


Criticisms
The actions of the Federal Reserve, including the creation of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, have expanded its balance sheet from $800 billion, consisting mainly of safe treasury bills, to over $2 trillion, consisting largely of riskier debt and mortgage-backed securities. The decision to expand the eligible collateral was criticized for further weakening the Fed's balance sheet. Also, the Fed's actions have been criticized as a power grab to become more powerful relative to other financial regulators such as the SEC and the FDIC.
Many have criticized the PDCF for lending to investment banks on the same terms as more tightly regulated financial institutions. They argue that since the Federal Reserve is now lending directly to investment banks that these institutions, along with other private-equity firms and hedge funds, should face broader regulation.
In a hearing of the United States House Committee on Financial Services on January 13, 2009, Rep. Alan Grayson (D-Fl) pressed Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Donald Kohn about releasing the details of exactly which firms have received funds from the Federal Reserve and specifically how much. The volume of lending at the PDCF was only published in the aggregate, shielding the identity of exactly which institutions used the facility and how much they borrowed. Data disclosing details of the loans is available on the Fed Board of Governors' site.


See also
Commercial Paper Funding Facility


References


External links
NYFR PDCF Terms

Prime Evil is the sixth studio album by British heavy metal band Venom. It was released in 1989 and is the first in a series of three albums with Atomkraft bassist and vocalist Tony Dolan, replacing Conrad "Cronos" Lant, as a band member and composer.


Track listing


Personnel
Venom
Demolition Man – bass, vocals
Mantas – lead guitar
Al Barnes – rhythm guitar
Abaddon – drums, percussion
Production
Nick Tauber, Kevin Ridley – production
Barry Clempson – engineering
Steve Brew – assistant engineering


References

During the Russo-Ukrainian war (2022–present), both Ukrainian and Russian/separatist prisoners of war have suffered several forms of abuse, such as mistreatment, exposure to public curiosity, torture, and even execution.
As of November 2022, the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (HRMMU) conducted 159 interviews with prisoners of war held by the Russian and Russian-affiliated forces, and 175 interviews with prisoners of war held by Ukraine. The mission later expressed concern about mistreatment of prisoners of war in the conflict, as it reported that prisoners of war held by both sides had been subject to several forms of abuse.


Ukrainian prisoners of war


Mistreatment of Ukrainian POWs
The HRMMU reported that Ukrainian soldiers had their personal belongings stolen during admission into POW camps, and that the prisoners were taken to the camps into overcrowded buses, with little to no access to water and toilets; many were blindfolded with their wrists bound with duct tape in a way that left many with wounds in these areas. The same was reported inside the camps themselves, with many POWs reporting overcrowded cells, as well as a lack of food, hygiene and contact with their families.
An August 2022 report by the Humanitarian Research Lab of the Yale School of Public Health identified 21 filtration camps for Ukrainian "civilians, POWs [prisoners of war], and other personnel" in the vicinity of Donetsk oblast. Imaging of one camp, the Olenivka prison, found two sites of disturbed earth consistent with "potential graves". Kaveh Khoshnood, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health, said: "Incommunicado detention of civilians is more than a violation of international humanitarian law—it represents a threat to the public health of those currently in the custody of Russia and its proxies." Conditions described by freed prisoners include exposure, insufficient access to sanitation, food and water, cramped conditions, electrical shocks and assault.
Journalistic investigations shared by The Guardian in April 2025 suggest that SIZO-2 in Taganrog is one of many torture prisons organised by Russia to hold Ukrainian POWs and civilians without formal charges, communication to people outside of the facility, or access to legal representation.


Humiliation of captured Ukrainian soldiers
Videos showing Ukrainian prisoners of war being forced to sing pro-Russian songs or carrying bruises have attracted concerns about their treatment. Dmytro Lubinets, head of the Ukrainian parliament's human rights committee, claimed that Russians forcibly shaved heads of female Ukrainian prisoners.
Captured Ukrainian soldiers with British citizenship were recorded calling for Boris Johnson to arrange for them to be freed in exchange for pro-Kremlin Ukrainian politician Viktor Medvedchuck. The videos were broadcast separately on Rossiya 24 TV channel, causing MP Robert Jenrick to call the videos a "flagrant breach" of the Third Geneva Convention. A Russian spokeswoman claimed that the Ukrainian prisoners of war with British nationality were being treated humanely, referenced a call by Boris Johnson for British prisoners to be shown mercy and said that in turn the UK should "show mercy" to the Ukrainian citizens by stopping military aid to the Ukrainian government.
Another video circulated showing an interview by pro-Kremlin UK journalist Graham Phillips (former reporter of RT and Zvezda) of Ukrainian war prisoner of British nationality Aiden Aslin. Aslin had served in the Ukrainian army for four years and was captured by the Russian army in Mariupol. In the video he appears in handcuffs with a cut on his forehead, is repeatedly called a "mercenary" rather than an official combatant, and told that his crime is punishable by death. The video was aired on Russian television. The United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine later expressed worries about the treatment of Ukrainian prisoners of war held by Russian and separatist forces.


Torture of Ukrainian POWs

The vast majority of Ukrainian prisoners who had in the hands of the Russian Federation and Russian-affiliated armed groups reported that they had been interned in dire conditions and subjected to torture and ill-treatment, including beatings, threats, dog attacks, mock executions, as well as electric and positional torture. Several women and male prisoners were threatened with sexual violence and subjected to degrading treatments and enforced nudity. A male prisoner reportedly had been pulled with ropes tied around genitalia; The UN agency also collected information about nine possible cases of death during the "admission procedures" to the internment camps.
On 22 July, Human Rights Watch documented the torture of three Ukrainian prisoners of war, members of the Territorial Defense Forces, and the death of two of them in the occupied areas of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia Oblasts.
As of 31 July 2022, OHCHR verified that, out of 35 interviewed, 27 Ukrainian prisoners of war had been subjected to torture by Russian and pro-Russian armed forces and policemen. Victims reported being punched, kicked, stabbed, beaten with police batons and wooden hammers, electrocuted with tasers, hung from the arms or legs, threatened with execution or sexual violence, or shot in the legs. One Ukrainian POW reported that he had been tortured with wires attached with his genitalia and nose, he described how the guards would torture POWs not only for obtaining information, but also "just for intimidation and humiliation", some women prisoners reported that they had not been victims of physical torture, but that they would be "tormented by the screams of other prisoners of war being tortured in nearby cells".
Also on 31 July, the OHCHR reported that it had received information about the deaths of two Ukrainian prisoners as a result of torture, one beaten and electrocuted on 9 May at the Melitopol airfield, the other beaten to death at the Volnovakha penal colony near Olenivka, Donetsk region, on 17 April. Eight other deaths were also under investigation.
In March 2023, UN human rights commissioner Volker Türk reported that more than 90% of the Ukrainian POWs interviewed by his office said they had been tortured or ill-treated in penitentiary facilities, which Russia despite several requests did not give UN staff access to. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture said in September 2023 that Russia's use of torture "is not random, aberrant behavior," but "orchestrated as part of state policy to intimidate, instill fear or punish to extract information and confessions".
In March 2024, a report by UN Human Rights Office indicated that 39 of the 60 Ukrainian POWs released during that month said that they had been subject to sexual violence during their internment. In October of that same year, a report by the OHCHR also confirmed the systematic use of different methods of torture against Ukrainian prisoners by Russian soldiers.
In June 2025 media published a photo of a Ukrainian soldier returned as part of prisoner exchange with "Glory to Russia" text burned into the skin on his abdomen while at a Russian hospital. The text was carved using professional surgical instruments, while he was in anesthesia.
In February 2026, journalists at Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty published an investigation which included private correspondence of the Russian general Roman Demurchiev, which included him boasting to close contacts and other members of the military about executing, torturing, and desecrating bodies of Ukrainian soldiers, including POWs. According to Meduza, the archive also revealed the complicity of Demurchiev's superiors.


Execution of surrendering and captured Ukrainian soldiers
At an Arria-formula meeting of the UN Security Council, the US ambassador-at-large for global criminal justice Beth Van Schaack said that US authorities have evidence that surrendering Ukrainian soldiers were executed by the Russian army in the Donbas region. A Ukrainian soldier who was shown among prisoners in a Russian video on 20 April, was confirmed dead days later.
Eyewitness accounts and a video filmed by a security camera provide evidence that on 4 March 2022 Russian paratroopers executed at least eight Ukrainian prisoners of war in Bucha.
In March 2024, the UN issued a report saying Russia may have executed more than 30 recently captured Ukrainian POWs over the winter. The UN Human Rights Office verified three incidents in which Russian servicemen executed seven Ukrainian servicemen. In October 2024, following Russian marines from the 155th Naval Infantry Brigade executing nine Ukrainian prisoners, Ukrainian authorities said that Russian forces had executed more than 100 surrendering Ukrainians during the invasion, most of them in 2024. Forbes described the incident as ″the latest in an escalating campaign of terror by Russian troops″. That same month, the EEAS described increasing frequency of Russian executions of Ukrainian prisoners, with at least 177 prisoners dying in Russian captivity since the beginning of the war.
In late January 2025, a video circulated around various social media outlets allegedly showing Russian military personnel executing Ukrainian POWs in an unidentifiable location in Donetsk Oblast. Six Ukrainian soldiers were captured by Russian personnel and were then reportedly disarmed and executed by Russian forces. The Russian personnel recorded the event, and their taunting of the POWs. Each executed soldier was forced to watch, and each where shot in the back. At the start of the video, a seventh Ukrainian soldier is lying motionless on the ground, their fate unknown. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine decried the shooting as an atrocity and forwarded relevant information to international organizations, such as the United Nations and Red Cross, due to the violation of the Geneva Convention. The Prosecutor General of Ukraine also launched an inquiry into the shooting.
On 6 November 2025, a Russian soldier accused of executing a surrendering Ukrainian soldier at point blank range was sentenced to life in prison by a Zaporizhzhia court. The following month, On 5 December, Russian troops reportedly shot and killed a Ukrainian soldier as he was surrendering, leading to a pre-trial war crime investigation by the Donetsk Regional Prosecutor's Office being launched.
As of December 2025, since 24 February 2022, the UN had verified the executions of 96 Ukrainian prisoners, while it found another 119 allegations of executions ″credible″. In the same time frame, the Prosecutor General of Ukraine office had pursued 103 criminal proceedings relating to the killings of 333 Ukrainian soldiers who had surrendered or laid down arms. According to Oleksandra Matviichuk, head of the Center for Civil Liberties and 2022 Nobel Peace Prize laureate, executing prisoners of war is one of Russia's tactics in its objective to ″break″ the Ukrainian population. A total of 41 member states of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe launched an investigation by experts on the ground in July 2025, and in its report in September 2025, it noted significant difficulties due to Russia's lack of cooperation and transparency, but concluded that several elements indicate that the executions are a regular occurrence.


Castration and murder of a Ukrainian POW in Pryvillia

On 28 July, a video was posted on Russian social media which shows a Russian soldier castrating a Ukrainian prisoner of war, who is tied up and gagged, with a box cutter. On the next day, a continuation video was posted with possibly the same soldiers where they taped the POW's mouth with black tape, placed his head in front of his cut genitals, and shot him in the head.
On 5 August, the Bellingcat group reported that the videos were geolocated to the Pryvillia Sanatorium, located in Pryvillia, Luhansk Oblast, and interviewed the apparent perpetrator by telephone. A white car marked with a Z – a designation marking Russian military vehicles and a militarist symbol used in Russian propaganda – can also be seen in the video; the same car can also be seen in earlier, official videos released by Russian channels, of the Akhmat fighters at the Azot plant during the Russian capture of Severodonetsk. Pryvillia had been captured and occupied by Russians since early July. Bellingcat identified the soldiers involved, including the main perpetrator (an inhabitant of Tuva), as members of the Akhmat unit. The investigation also indicated that the video contained no evidence of tampering or editing.


Olenivka prison massacre

On 29 July 2022, a Russian-operated prison in Molodizhne near Olenivka, Donetsk Oblast, was destroyed, killing 53 Ukrainian prisoners of war and leaving 75 wounded. The prisoners were mainly soldiers from the Azovstal complex, the last Ukrainian stronghold in the siege of Mariupol.
Both Ukrainian and Russian authorities accused each other of the attack on the prison. The General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces said that the Russians blew up the barrack in order to cover up the torture and murder of Ukrainian POWs that had been taking place there, and Ukrainian authorities provided what they said were satellite images of pre-dug graves and intercepted communications indicating Russian culpability, while Russians suggest that a HIMARS rocket was shot from Ukrainian territory.
On 3 August, the UN secretary-general Antonio Guterres announced his decision to establish a fact-finding mission, as requested both by Russia and Ukraine.


Execution of Oleksandr Matsievskyi

In early March a graphic 12-second video showing an unarmed soldier with a Ukrainian uniform, who is standing in a shallow trench, he says "Slava Ukraini" ("Glory to Ukraine"), while calmly smoking a cigarette, the Russian officer in charge of the prisoner (off camera) then shouts "Die Bitch!" and fires multiple rounds from a machine gun into him, several other shots are heard, and the prisoner collapses. Before the murder, he was allegedly forced to dig his own grave, in the video he is in a hole, and there is a shovel behind him. Several Ukrainian officials condemned the execution, with the President of Ukraine's office calling the execution a "brutal murder".


Beheading and mutilation of Ukrainian soldiers

In April 2023, two videos surfaced which appeared to show beheaded and mutilated Ukrainian soldiers. One video purportedly filmed by Wagner Group mercenaries and posted on April 8, shows the bodies of two Ukrainian soldiers next to a destroyed military vehicle, their heads and hands missing, with a voice commenting in Russian in the background.
The second video, posted on April 11, shows a man lying on the ground, dressed in a military uniform with a yellow band on the sleeve, a man with a white bandage on the leg approaches, then decapitates the prisoner, who screams in pain, he is apparently given instructions on the radio, nearby there are people shouting in Russian: "We work, brothers! Cut if off, asshole! Break his spine! What, you've never cut off some heads? Until the end, asshole." According to CNN, this video was probably shot in the summer of 2022, mainly because of the amount of green plants and grass present in the video.
Russian social media accounts claimed that the videos were shot near Bakhmut.  Both videos led to strong condemnation by western and Ukrainian officials and media, with some drawing comparisons between this case and beheadings by the Islamic State.
In May 2026, Ukraine's General Staff said that a Russian commander ordered the beheading of the bodies of two Ukrainian soldiers killed near Huliaipole and for them to be put on display.


Illegal trials of Ukrainian prisoners
Russia has prosecuted multiple Ukrainian prisoners for being members of the Azov Brigade, which it considers a terrorist organisation. Human Rights Watch noted that as the defendants' alleged actions were not illegal in the time and place they were committed, such prosecutions violated the Third Geneva Convention on the Treatment of Prisoners of War, as they appeared to be retaliation against the prisoners for their participation in the defence of Ukraine.


Death sentence against foreign citizens serving in the Ukrainian armed forces
Following a trial by the Supreme Court of the Donetsk People's Republic, three foreign-born members of the Ukrainian armed forces, Aiden Aslin, Shaun Pinner, and Brahim Saadoun were declared mercenaries and sentenced to execution by firing squad. Aslin and Pinner, originally from England, had been serving in the Ukrainian military since 2018, while Saadoun had come in 2019 from Morocco to study in Kyiv, having enlisted in November 2021. The ruling was described as illegal because the defendants qualify as prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions and have not been accused of committing any war crimes.
On 10 June the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights condemned the death sentences and the trial. A spokesperson of the organisation declared that "such trials against prisoners of war amount to a war crime," and highlighted that according to the chief command of Ukraine, all the defendants were part of the Ukrainian armed forces and therefore should not have been considered mercenaries. The OHCHR spokesperson also expressed concern about procedural fairness, stating that "since 2015, we have observed that the so-called judiciary within these self-contained republics has not complied with essential fair trial guarantees, such as public hearings, independence, impartiality of the courts and the right not to be compelled to testify."
The International Bar Association issued a statement saying "that any implementation of the ‘pronounced’ death penalty will be an obvious case of plain murder of Aiden Aslin, Shaun Pinner and Brahim Saaudun and deemed an international war crime. Any perpetrators (anyone engaged in the so-called DPR ‘court’ and anyone who conspired to execute this decision) will be regarded as war criminals", also pointing out that neither Russian nor Ukrainian law allows the death penalty.
On 12 June, Donetsk People's Republic leader Denis Pushilin reiterated that the separatists did not see the trio as prisoners of war, but rather as people who came to Ukraine to kill civilians for money, adding that he saw no reason to modify or mitigate the sentences. Russian State Duma Chairman Vyacheslav Volodin accused the trio of fascism, reiterating that they deserved the death penalty. He added that the Ukrainian armed forces were committing crimes against humanity and were being controlled by a neo-Nazi regime in Kyiv.
On 17 June, the European Court of Human Rights issued an emergency stay of Saadoun Brahim's execution. It stressed that Russia was still obliged to follow the court's rulings. Earlier in June, the Russian State Duma passed a law to end the jurisdiction of the court in Russia, but it had not yet been signed into law.
On 8 July the DPR lifted a moratorium on the death penalty. On 21 September five British citizens held by pro-Russian separatists were released, including those sentenced to death, the Moroccan citizen Saadoun Brahim was also freed after a prisoner exchange between Ukraine and Russia.


Coercion of Ukrainian POWs to fight for Russia

In October 2023, Russian state media reported on the creation of the "Bohdan Khmelnytsky Battalion", a so-called "volunteer battalion" of Russia whose members are Ukrainian POWs who were "recruited" from Russian penal colonies. The Institute for the Study of War has assessed that it is likely that Russia has coerced the Ukrainians to join the formation, which violates the Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War, which dictates "no prisoner of war may at any time be sent to or detained in areas where he may be exposed to the fire of the combat zone", and shall not "be employed on labor which is of an unhealthy or dangerous nature". Russian state media has claimed that the battalion has "recruited" roughly 70 Ukrainian POWs in February alone. However some sources state that up to 200 Ukrainian POWs have joined the battalion It was reported that members of the battalion have begun training and will begin fighting in "an unspecified area of the front line" when they are done.


Russian prisoners of war


Options for surrendering

On 18 September 2022, the Ukrainian Coordination Headquarters for the Treatment of Prisoners of War (Ukrainian: Координаційний штаб з питань поводження з військовополоненими), as a continuation of the project designed to inform the Russian military about the possibility of laying down weapons and preserving their lives, launched a special state project called "I Want to Live", with a 24-hour hotline for receiving appeals from the Russian military and their families. The project states that Russian servicemen can submit an application to surrender through various methods including calling the round-the-clock hotline, or following instructions from a chatbot on the project's Telegram. They are then given instructions on how to practically surrender to one of the Ukrainian military formations, such as the Armed Forces of Ukraine, the Territorial Defence Forces, the National Police, the National Guard, or the Security Service of Ukraine.
The Prosecutor-General of Russia blocked access to the website of "I Want to Live" in October 2022, but it remained operational. On 4 May 2023, the hotline's spokesperson Vitaliy Matvienko stated that it received requests to surrender from 3200 Russian soldiers in April 2023, representing a 10% increase over March 2023. He added that the hotline had received a total of 16,000 requests to surrender since its inception. Its website had been accessed over 36 million times, 32 million visits of which were made from the territory of the Russian Federation.
The I Want to Live project website states that Ukrainian authorities will treat prisoners of war in compliance with the Geneva Conventions. Surrendering Russians soldiers are said to be guaranteed the right to life and the prohibition of torture in accordance with international law. POWs are to be offered three meals a day, legal support, and medical attention once their application to surrender has been approved. Soldiers in Russian service who voluntarily hand over their weapons and military equipment would reportedly also be given amnesty. To those who have surrendered, the Ukrainian authorities offer the opportunity to call their relatives and friends, and to take part in a prisoner exchange organized between the governments of Russia and Ukraine, or to remain temporarily in detention with the possibility of staying in Ukraine or emigrating later. Some individual Russian soldiers have been reported as surrendering to Ukraine, and then given permission to join the Ukrainian military instead. For example, a Yekaterinburg tank driver was the only surviving crew member when his tank was destroyed; surrendering to the Ukrainians using a white flag, he was surprised that he was not tortured (as he feared). Believing a return to Russia impossible, he later joined their side to repair captured Russian tanks and armoured vehicles.
In March 2026, Forbes published an article describing Ukraine using robots and drones to capture Russian soldiers. One instance mentioned was in 2024, when a video showcased a Russian soldier surrendering when a Ukrainian drone approached with a loudspeaker bringing instructions. In January 2026, footage appeared of three Russian soldiers surrendering to a Ukrainian unmanned ground vehicle.


Mistreatment of captured Russian soldiers


Public exposure of Russian POWs
Since 27 February, the Ukrainian Ministry of Internal Affairs has shared on social media photos and videos of killed Russian soldiers, soon followed by dozens of videos of prisoners of war under interrogation, sometimes blindfolded or bound, revealing their names and personal information, and expressing regret over their involvement in the invasion. The videos have raised concerns about potential violations of Article 13 Third Geneva Convention, which states that prisoners of war should be protected "against insults and public curiosity." On 7 March, Amnesty International released a statement saying that "it is essential that all parties to the conflict fully respect the rights of prisoners of war," and saying that filmed prisoners of war and their families could be put at risk of reprisals following repatriation to Russia.
On 16 March, Human Rights Watch described the videos as intentional humiliation and shaming, and urged the Ukrainian authorities to stop posting them on social media and messaging apps. Analogous concerns were expressed by various Western newspapers. A spokeswoman for the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Elizabeth Throssell, said that the videos, if genuine, were likely to be incompatible with human dignity and current international humanitarian law. Interviewed by Der Spiegel, international law expert Daniel-Erasmus Khan said that "letting POWs call home is actually a good thing, filming it and putting it online however is not," as it was incompatible with the Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war.


Torture of Russian and separatist soldiers

Some Russian and Russian-affiliated prisoners of war who were in the hands of Ukrainian forces made allegations of summary executions, torture and ill-treatment by members of the Ukrainian forces, in some cases, Russian prisoners were stabbed and subjected to electric torture. Ukraine later launched criminal investigations into allegations of mistreatment of Russian prisoners of war by the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
According to the 26 March 2022 OHCHR report, the HRMMU was aware of one allegation of a threat of sexual violence by a Ukrainian soldier, in which "a captured Russian military member was threatened with castration on camera".
As of 31 July 2022, OHCHR documented 50 cases of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners of war in the power of Ukraine, including cases of Russian and separatist soldiers being beaten, kicked or shot during capture or interrogation, some also reported suffering electrocution and positional torture while under interrogation. One prisoner of war was reportedly suffocated by Ukrainian policemen of the Kharkiv SBU during his interrogation. Many Russian and separatist soldiers also reported "horrible conditions" during transport to POW camps, with many being stripped naked and having their wrists tied.


Torture of Russian POWs in Mala Rohan

According to a report by the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), members of Ukrainian armed forces shot the legs of three captured Russian soldiers and tortured Russian soldiers who were wounded. The incident is likely to have occurred on the evening of 25 March in Mala Rohan, south-east of Kharkiv, in an area recently recaptured by Ukrainian troops, and was first reported following the publication on social media accounts of a video of unknown authorship between 27 March and 28 March. One of the video's versions depicts a number of soldiers lying on the ground; many appear to be bleeding from leg wounds. Three prisoners are brought out of a vehicle and shot in the leg  by someone off-camera. According to the OHCHR, as a documented case of summary execution and torture of prisoners of war, the incident qualifies as a war crime.


Execution of surrendering and captured Russian soldiers


'No quarter' orders
On 2 March 2022, after the shelling of residential areas, Ukraine's Special Operations Forces threatened that Russian artillerymen will no longer be taken prisoner, but immediately killed. On 29 June, the OHCHR documented three incidents where Ukrainian servicemen and one incident where a Russian serviceman made public threats of giving no quarter to prisoners of war. Commander of the Georgian Legion Mamuka Mamulashvili denied such accusations.


Execution of Russian POWs in Dmytrivka
On 6 April a video apparently showing Ukrainian troops of the Georgian Legion executing captured Russian soldiers was posted on Telegram. The video was verified by The New York Times and by Reuters. A wounded Russian soldier was seemingly shot twice by a Ukrainian soldier while lying on the ground. Three dead Russian soldiers, including one with a head wound and hands tied behind his back, were shown near the soldier. The video appeared to have been filmed on a road north of the village of Dmytrivka, seven miles south of Bucha.
The Georgian Legion's commander Mamuka Mamulashvili acknowledged that killing of Russian prisoners of war was done under his own orders by a patrol of the Georgian Legion. Mamulashvili justified no quarter for Russian soldiers as a response to the Bucha massacre.
Mamuka Mamulashvili has also denied the allegations of war crimes by the Georgian Legion, saying the video does not show members of the Legion. Some Ukrainian authorities (such as Minister of Foreign Affairs Dmytro Kuleba) promised an investigation. While others took less clear positions.


Makiivka surrender incident

On 12 November, a video appeared on pro-Ukrainian websites showing the bodies of soldiers in Russian uniforms lying on the ground in a farmyard in the Makiivka area. On 17 November, more footage emerged, taken from the ground by a person at the scene. The video shows the Russian soldiers as they exit a building, surrender, and lay face down on the ground. Then another Russian soldier emerges from the same building and opens fire on the Ukrainian soldiers who are surprised. An aerial video from the site documents the aftermath, with at least 12 bodies of Russian soldiers, most positioned as they were when they surrendered, bleeding from gunshot wounds to the head.
The authenticity of the videos was verified by The New York Times. Russia and Ukraine accused each other of war crimes, with Russia accusing Ukraine of "mercilessly shooting unarmed Russian P.O.W.s," and Ukraine accusing the Russians of opening fire while surrendering. Ukraine's officials said the Prosecutor General’s office would investigate the video footage as the incident may qualify as a crime of  "perfidy" committed by the Russian troops in feigning surrender. On 25 November the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Volker Türk  said “Our Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has conducted a preliminary analysis indicating that these disturbing videos are highly likely to be authentic in what they show” and called on the Ukrainian authorities to investigate the allegations of summary executions of Russian prisoners of war "in a manner that is – and is seen to be – independent, impartial, thorough, transparent, prompt and effective.”


Chosen Company executions
In 2024, German medical officer Caspar Grosse spoke to the New York Times about three incidents where members of Chosen Company, a foreign volunteer unit, executed Russian POWs. The New York Times noted that while Grosse's accounts are the only available evidence of the killings, they "are bolstered by his contemporaneous notes, video footage and text messages exchanged by members of the unit and reviewed by The Times."
In the first alleged incident dated August 2023, a severely injured, unarmed Russian soldier was crawling through a trench and begging for help in a mix of broken English and Russian. The Russian was then allegedly shot in the chest by a member of Chosen Company. When the Russian soldier continued to move and breathe, another fighter shot him in the head. In the second incident, a Chosen member lobbed a grenade at and killed a Russian soldier who allegedly had his hands raised. Video evidence of the incident was reviewed by the New York Times. In the third incident, Chosen members boasted in a group chat about killing Russian prisoners of war during a mission in October, text messages show. A soldier who was briefly in command that day alluded to the killings using a slang word for shooting. He said he would take responsibility. "If anything comes out about alleged POW blamming, I ordered it," wrote the soldier, who goes by the call sign Andok. He added an image of a Croatian war criminal who died in 2017 after drinking poison during a tribunal at The Hague and added the message "At the Hague ‘I regret nothing!’" under the image. The New York Times reported that this it was "one of several text messages" that make reference, directly or obliquely, to killing prisoners.


Prosecution of separatist POWs
The HRMMU also expressed concern about the prosecution of pro-Russian separatists for mere participation in the hostilities, which is prohibited under international humanitarian law. On 1 December 2023, two pro-Russian separatists from the Donbas were captured by Ukraine and were sentenced to 12 years in prison for treason. On 6 December 2023, a resident of Luhansk Oblast who was captured near Bilohorivka in May 2023 was sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment for joining the Luhansk People's Militia.


Capture of North Korean soldiers

On January 11, 2025, Ukraine announced to have captured two wounded North Korean soldiers during the Kursk offensive, which were the first two North Korean prisoners of the war. The South Korean National Intelligence Service confirmed the North Korean origin of the two prisoners.


Prisoner and human remains exchanges

Russia and Ukraine exchanged 206 prisoners of war through an agreement negotiated by the United Arab Emirates in September 2024. Under another agreement facilitated by the United Arab Emirates, Russia and Ukraine exchanged 190 prisoners of war in November 2024.
In February 2026, the Ukrainian authorities stated that about 7,000 prisoners of war were being held by Russia and nearly 4,000 prisoners of war were in Ukrainian custody. The International Committee of the Red Cross stated that to that date they had received about 200,000 requests from families on both sides regarding presumed prisoners of war or missing and possibly killed in action persons.
In April 2026, Russia returned the bodies or remains of 1,000 soldiers to Ukraine, and Ukraine returned the bodies of 41 soldiers to Russia during a repatriation exchange. Since 2022 over 70 repatriations of human remains had taken place.
In June 2026, Ukrainian investigators said that as a result of explosive devices being discovered in bodies of Ukrainian soldiers repatriated by Russia, mandatory safety checks are made before identification can begin.


See also

Allegations of genocide of Ukrainians in the Russo-Ukrainian War
Casualties of the Russo-Ukrainian War and prisoners of war
Russian war crimes and Ukraine
Soviet atrocities committed against prisoners of war during World War II
War crimes in Donbas


Notes


References


External links

Proiphys amboinensis is the type species of the flowering plant genus Proiphys. Its common names include Cardwell lily and northern Christmas lily (as it usually flowers around Christmas). It is considered native to Thailand, Indonesia (Maluku, Sulawesi, Bali, Lombok, Timor), the Philippines, the Bismark Archipelago, Vanuatu, New Guinea and Australia (Queensland and Western Australia). It is also naturalized in Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Solomon Islands, Niue, Society Islands, Caroline Islands and Mariana Islands.


Taxonomy
Its species epithet amboinensis was named after the island of Ambonia, now Ambon in Indonesia.


Description
The Caldwell lily grows on seashores and rocky places up to an altitude of 500 metres. It prefers open, lightly shaded rainforests. It grows from a bulb measuring up to 8 centimetres in diameter; it grows quickly after the arrival of the wet season in Australia. Its leaves are ovate and nearly circular measuring 20–30 cm long and 15–35 cm wide from stalks between 15 and 60 centimetres long. The leaves die away in the dry season.


Umbel

A total of 5–25 white flowers grow in an umbel on stalks over between 15 and 90 cm long, each flower is trumpet shaped and release a pleasant scent with filaments 2–3 mm long. Flowering in Australia typically begins in late December while flowering season in India is from May to June.
Fruit produced from pollination are green to blackish capsules 25–30 mm across.


Cultivation and uses
It is a good container plant that needs much water in the growing season. Propagate from seed or lift the bulb.


References

Prosternon is a genus of click beetles belonging to the family Elateridae.


Species
Species within this genus include:

Prosternon admirabile Gurjeva, 1984
Prosternon aurichalceum Stepanov, 1930
Prosternon bombycinus (Germar, 1843)
Prosternon chrysocomum (Germar, 1843)
Prosternon egregium Denisova, 1948
Prosternon fallax (Say, 1834)
Prosternon hamata (Say, 1834)
Prosternon hoppingi (Van Dyke, 1932)
Prosternon medianus (Germar, 1843)
Prosternon mirabilis (Fall, 1901)
Prosternon montanum Gurjeva, 1980
Prosternon semilutea (LeConte, 1853)
Prosternon sericeum (Gebler, 1824)
Prosternon syriacum Buysson, 1891
Prosternon tessellatum (Linnaeus, 1758)
Prosternon viduus (Brown, 1936)


References

Provincial Highway 39 is a Taiwanese highway that starts from Xinhua, Tainan City and ends in Alian District, Kaohsiung. The highway connects THSR Tainan Station with Tainan City and northern Kaohsiung City, and runs along the underpass of the elevated viaduct for high-speed rail. The route length is 18.83 kilometres (11.70 mi) .


See also
Highway system in Taiwan


References


External links

Pseudischyrus is a small genus of tiny pleasing fungus beetles (family Erotylidae), containing only three described species which are apparently endemic to the USA. Little-known, this genus might just barely range into extreme northeastern Mexico, but probably they do not even reach the lower Rio Grande.
Genus Pseudischyrus is placed in subfamily Tritominae, or – in taxonomic arrangements that prefer a more comprehensive subfamily Erotylinae – in tribe Tritomini of the Erotylinae. It is considered closely related to the highly diverse Tritoma, and may even be embedded therein, making it important for any attempt to review the internal relationships of Tritoma.
Species of Pseudischyrus can only be reliably distinguished by anatomical details – the shape of the prosternum, and some features of their genitalia &ndash'; and seem to form a cryptic species complex.


Description
Pseudischyrus adults are small even by the standards of their family, one-quarter of an inch long and one-tenth of an inch wide at most, and usually a bit smaller, 3-5 mm long and 1.5-2.75 mm wide. At a casual glance, they seem halfway between their close relatives Ischyrus and Tritoma in shape, being an elongated oval when seen from above, slightly convex on top, and with a moderate sheen. In the details of their anatomy, they are altogether strikingly similar to Tritoma humeralis and its closest relatives within that genus, such as T.atriventris which also a similar range as Pseudischyrus, as well as to T.tenebrosa and the related species which have a similar uniform coloration. The main difference, however, are the very large compound eyes consisting of many huge ommatidia.
Beetles of this genus have a generally chestnut brown color; they are a light straw-brown when freshly emerged from the pupa, but soon darken to a mahogany to blackish-brown hue depending on species. The legs and antennae are slightly lighter, but this can only be clearly recognized in the darkest individuals.

Head
The head has strikingly large compound eyes, whose individual ommatidia are also outsized. The top of the head between the ocular striae, is narrowed between the eyes and widens to the front, and the epistome has a pronounced bulge just behind the tip. All Pseudischyrus adults possess well-developed file-like structures that, when the beetle wiggles its head, rub against the chitin and produce a squeaking sound; the degree of development of these structures varies but is generally unreliable for distinguishing males and females. The front margin of the clypeus has a thin bead-like rim. Their mouth parts are indistinguishable from those of Tritoma unicolor, with a mentum that is triangular and not conspicuously wider than high, and no teeth at the tip of the maxillary lacinia; the last segment of the maxillary palps is wide and sharply cut-off at the tip.
Body
The sides of the pronotum are slightly curved towards the forward end. The pronotal margin is continuous except for the center of the base. The prosternum has a narrow bell-shape, and at the inner edge of the coxae there are impressed lines which conspicuously curve together at the front. The metacoxal lines are shortened, but conspicuous.
Unlike in some other Erotylidae, males and females do not have conspicuously different external abdominal structures. The male genitalia, especially the aedeagus, resemble those of Tritoma biguttata, while the female genitalia of Pseudischyrus are more similar to those of T.humeralis, in particular the genital tube, whose valvifers lack ventral baculi.
Wings and legs
Members of this genus have a fully functional set of two pairs of wings, with the tough elytra covering the parchment-like foldable hindwings at rest. The elytra at their widest point are wider than the prothorax where it meets the elytra, and have regular rows of small punctuations.
The attachments of each leg pair are neither particularly close as in Triplax, nor conspicuously far away as in Tritoma. The tibiae widen conspicuously towards the tips, and segment 4 of the tarsi is reduced, and attached to the upper centerside of segment 3.


Distribution and ecology
These beetles have this far only been found in the southern and central USA. Their western limit is probably near the 100th meridian west, a major biogeographic boundary. However, few actual records west of the 98th meridian west exist, and among more than a hundred specimens, none were found southwest of Blanco, Burnet and Goliad counties, and the San Antonio region, 120-150 miles (200-240 km) from the Mexican border. In the northeast, the genus has been recorded at Southern Pines in central North Carolina; to the west, records exist from eastern Kansas. Specimens have been collected at least between April and October, but most in July and August.
Despite being abundant and easily caught, almost nothing is known about the lifestyle of these beetles and their larvae. The unusual eyes suggest they are nocturnal animals with excellent low-light vision; like many of their relatives they can be attracted with lights at night. Some have been found hiding under the bark of dead oaks in Florida; presumably, like their relatives they are forest dwellers that eat fungi.


Taxonomy and systematics
Three species are placed in genus Pseudischyrus:

Pseudischyrus extricatus (Crotch, 1873)
Pseudischyrus nigrans (Crotch, 1873) (= P.acuminatus)
Pseudischyrus ventriloquax Boyle, 1956
The type species is P.nigrans, described as Ischyrus nigrans by George Crotch 1873. When Thomas Casey established the genus Pseudischyrus in 1916, he also assigned the Tritoma brunnea described in 1842 by Jean Lacordaire to it. Casey was mistaken, however, because Lacordaire, who emphasized finely faceted eyes as a key trait of his Tritoma, would not have placed a Pseudischyrus specimen into that genus. Rather, Lacordaire's T.brunnea, as understood by contemporary authors such as John LeConte, refers to T.angulata. Casey's "T.brunnea", meanwhile, is referable to P.extricatus, while his supposed new species P.acuminatus cannot be reliably distinguished from P.nigrans.
In 1917, Blatchley established Tritoma dissimilis, unaware of Casey's publication of Pseudischyrus in a little-read journal the previous year; the type specimen is a P.nigrans, but subsequent authors also labeled specimens of P.extricatus as "T.dissimilis". Casey himself, eight years after setting up Pseudischyrus, mistakenly re-described a number of specimens representing at least 2 species of this genus as "Tritoma pallens"; his type specimen was an adult of P.extricatus that had emerged from the pupa just shortly before getting caught, and thus still had a soft exoskeleton with a lighter yellowish color.


References

Puppis Pikes (71°16′S 66°24′W) is a loosely defined group of pointed nunataks and smaller outcrops running roughly east–west, located 7 nautical miles (13 km) northeast of Mount Cadbury in Palmer Land. Named by United Kingdom Antarctic Place-Names Committee (UK-APC) after the constellation of Puppis.
 This article incorporates public domain material from "Puppis Pikes". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey.

Putylivka  is a village located in Pokrovske rural hromada, Dnipropetrovsk Oblast between the cities of Kryvyi Rih and Dnipro in Ukraine. The population is 301.


History
The village is a former Jewish agricultural colony and a member of the former Jewish district of Satlindorf created in the 1920s, consisting of dozens of Jewish agricultural colonies.
During World War II, the village was occupied by Germans from 1941 to 1943. In October 1941, approximately 100 Jews were shot in a pit by a German Einsatzgruppen. There is a memorial at the execution site.


References

Pyetrykaw or Petrikov (Belarusian: Петрыкаў, romanized: Pietrykaŭ; Russian: Петриков; Polish: Petryków) is a town in Gomel Region, in southern Belarus. It serves as the administrative center of Pyetrykaw District. At the 2009 census, its population was 10,591. As of 2025, it has a population of 10,278.


Geography
Pyetrykaw is located on the left (north) bank of the Pripyat River, 89 kilometres (55 mi) west of Mazyr and 190 kilometres (118 mi) west of the city of Gomel, the regional capital.


History
Before 1500, the history of Pyetrykaw is that of the Principality of Turov and Pinsk. Thus it passed under control of the Kingdom of Galicia–Volhynia in the early 13th century, and was devastated in 1240 by the Mongols, and thereafter remained under the titular control of the Golden Horde until it joined the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the early 14th century.  In 1502 and 1521 the area was attacked by Tatars from the newly independent Crimean Khanate.
The first written mention of Pyetrykaw goes back to the year 1523, where the community was under the Olelkovich family's Principality of Slutsk–Kapyl, part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The town became part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569, and so remained until its annexation by the Russian Empire at the second partition of Poland in 1793. Pyetrykaw was administratively placed in the Mozyrsky Uyezd of Minsk Governorate. By the 19th century, it had come under the control of the Chodkiewicz noble family.

In 1900, Pyetrykaw was located in the Pale of Settlement, an area of the Russian Empire that allowed resident Jews and thus had a Jewish community of 2,151, 38.8% of the total population. The town was occupied by the Germans in World War I. It was taken by the Poles in 1920-1921, during the Polish-Soviet War. Pyetrykaw received its status as a town in 1923.
During World War II, the town was first occupied by the Soviet Union and then by the Germans who exterminated the Jewish community. Pyetrykaw was taken from the Germans on 30 June 1944 as part of Operation Bagration by the soldiers of the 55th Mozyr Red Rifle Division of the 61st Army of the 1st Belorussian Front and sailors of the 20th Brigade of the Dnieper Flotilla. More than 3,000 casualties were suffered by the Soviet troops during the battle for Pyetrykaw.
Pyetrykaw is located in the area affected by the Chernobyl disaster.


Notable people
Source:

Lev Leitman (1896 – 1974). Belarusian graphic artist and teacher. He worked in easel graphics, primarily in watercolor and gouache. His works include landscapes, portraits, still lifes, industrial-themed paintings, and views of Vitebsk and Minsk.
Valentina Vergey (born 1946). Belarusian historian and archaeologist. His main research interests include the historiography of Belarusian archaeology and the Iron Age population of Belarusian Polesie. She discovered and studied approximately 100 archaeological sites in Belarusian Polesie.
Mikhail Kebets (1949 – 2005). Belarusian artist. He worked primarily in watercolor. His main works include the paintings "Forest Road," "May," "Spring on Mukhatsy"; and the series "Pa Palessyu" and "Berasceyshchyna." He also painted portraits. The works are in the Brest Museum of Local History.


Economy
Among the first industries in Pyetrykaw were the construction of barges for the river traffic and a brick factory. During the Soviet era the shipyard was expanded and various small manufacturing plants were built, including a bread factory. The town depends upon both river traffic and road traffic for much of its livelihood. There are good road connections with Gomel, Brest and Mazyr.  There is no bridge across the Pripyat, but there is regular ferry service.
The regional newspaper Петрыкаўскія навіны ("Pyetrykaw News") is published there.


References

Pyramid Peak is a mountain in the California's Sierra Nevada in the Crystal Range to the west of Lake Tahoe. It is the highest point in the Desolation Wilderness. With an elevation gain of almost 4,100 feet (1,250 m), the Rocky Canyon route is the mountain's most popular approach although it is very arduous. To the east, at the base of the peak, lies Pyramid Lake.


References


External links
"Pyramid Peak". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior.
"Pyramid Peak". SummitPost.org.
Alpine Ski Tours - Lake Tahoe: Southwest Topographic Map

Royal Air Force Southend or more simply RAF Southend is a former Royal Air Force station located near to Rochford, Essex, UK. At the start of the Second World War it was known as RAF Rochford. 
The site is now known as London Southend Airport.


Units
The following units were here at some point:

First World War units

Units


Current use
The site is now London Southend Airport.


See also
List of former Royal Air Force stations


References


Citations


Bibliography
Jefford, C. G. (2001). RAF Squadrons. A comprehensive record of the movement and equipment of all RAF squadrons and their antecedents since 1912 (2nd ed.). Shrewsbury, UK: Airlife  Publishing. ISBN 1-84037-141-2.
Sturtivant, Ray; Hamlin, John (2007). Royal Air Force flying training and support units since 1912. Tonbridge, UK: Air-Britain (Historians). ISBN 978-0851-3036-59.

The RWD 1 was a Polish sports plane of 1928, a single-engine high-wing monoplane constructed by the RWD design team.


Development
The RWD 1 was the first aircraft constructed by the RWD team of Stanisław Rogalski, Stanisław Wigura and Jerzy Drzewiecki in the Aviation Section of Mechanic Students' Club of Warsaw University of Technology. It was designed in late 1927. The plane was built with a financial help of the LOPP organization. One prototype was built for static trials, and one flying prototype (registration SP-ACC), completed and flown by the designer Jerzy Drzewiecki in September 1928.
Its unusual feature was a unique, fish-shaped fuselage, similar to early Messerschmitt's designs (M17). Two crewmen sat in tandem inside the fuselage and had only side openings in its upper part. In front of the pilot's head there was an upper part of the fuselage, supporting wings, limiting his view forward, though its profile was thin. This shape was repeated in following RWD designs. The aircraft was evaluated as a quite good design, with an original construction. It had high glide ratio of 12, and its payload was bigger than its empty weight. It was not built in any quantities, but gave a basis to further more successful RWD designs: RWD 2, RWD 3, RWD 4, RWD 7, and, partly RWD 5.
The prototype took part in the 2nd Polish Light Aircraft Contest in 1928, but did not complete it due to engine breakdown. In 1929 it took part in an air rally around Poland. It was scrapped in winter of 1929/1930.


Description
Wooden construction single-engine high-wing cantilever monoplane, conventional in layout. The fuselage rectangular in cross-section, narrowing in upper part, plywood covered. Single-spar one-part trapezoid wings, covered with canvas and plywood in front. Cantilever empennage, covered with plywood (stabilizers) and canvas (rudder and elevators). The crew of two sat in tandem. The crew cockpits were open on the sides in upper part, and had individual doors (first cockpit on the right, second one on the left). A 2-cylinder air-cooled 40 hp ABC Scorpion II boxer engine (34 hp nominal power) was in front, driving two-blade wooden propeller Szomański (1.5 m diameter). Conventional fixed landing gear, sprung with a rubber rope, with a rear skid. Fuel tank in fuselage front (fuel consumption 9 L/h).


Specifications (RWD 1)

Data from samoloty.ow : RWD 1, Polish aircraft 1893-1939General characteristics
Crew: 1
Capacity: 1 passenger / second pilot 211 kg (465 lb)
Length: 6 m (19 ft 8 in)
Wingspan: 9.8 m (32 ft 2 in)
Height: 1.7 m (5 ft 7 in)
Wing area: 13.6 m2 (146 sq ft)
Empty weight: 206 kg (454 lb)
Gross weight: 417 kg (919 lb)
Powerplant: 1 × ABC Scorpion II 2-cylinder air-cooled horizontally-opposed piston engine, 25 kW (34 hp)   nominal
30 kW (40 hp) for take-off
Propellers: 2-bladed Szomański fixed-pitch wooden propeller, 1.5 m (4 ft 11 in) diameter
Performance

Maximum speed: 135 km/h (84 mph, 73 kn)
Cruise speed: 115 km/h (71 mph, 62 kn)
Stall speed: 65 km/h (40 mph, 35 kn)
Range: 500 km (310 mi, 270 nmi)
Service ceiling: 1,950 m (6,400 ft)
Rate of climb: 1.8 m/s (350 ft/min)
Wing loading: 30.66 kg/m2 (6.28 lb/sq ft)
Power/mass: 0.0705 kW/kg (0.0429 hp/lb)
Take-off run: 100 m (328 ft)
Landing run: 130 m (427 ft)


See also

Related development

RWD 2, RWD 3, RWD 4, RWD 7
Aircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era

Messerschmitt M17


References


Further reading
Glass, Andrzej (1977). Polskie konstrukcje lotnicze 1893–1939 (in Polish). Warsaw: WKiŁ.


External links

Photos and description (in Polish)

Raghuvinder Singh Shokeen  is an Indian politician and is a former member of the Sixth Legislative Assembly of Delhi. He lost to Manoj Kumar Shokeen of Bharatiya Janata Party by 26,251 votes in Delhi Legislative Assembly Elections held in February 2025. He is a member of the Aam Aadmi Party and formerly represented Nangloi Jat (Assembly constituency) of Delhi. Shokeen has served as  a councillor for two terms.


Early life and education
He is a graduate in engineering (1983–88) from NIT (erstwhile REC) Kurukshetra. He used to be active in politics during college days.


Electoral performance


2025

 


Posts held


See also

Sixth Legislative Assembly of Delhi
Delhi Legislative Assembly
Government of India
Politics of India
Aam Aadmi Party


References

The Raid on Tiahynka was a naval engagement that took place in August 1492 between the fleet of the Ottoman Empire and the Zaporozhian Cossacks led by Bohdan Glynsky near the fortress of Tiahyn (now the village of Tiahynka, Ukraine) and ended in a Cossack success.


Background
In 1491, the lands where the Tiahyn castle is located were reconquered by the Crimean Khanate, and the fortress was rebuilt by the Crimean khan Meñli I Giray, and it became one of the outposts from which the Tatars raided Ruthenian lands.


Raid
On 1 August 1492, the Zaporozhian Cossacks led by Bohdan Glynsky set off for a campaign into the Dnieper from Kaniv and Cherkasy. Near Tiagin (Tiahynka) they attacked an Ottoman-Tatar ship. A battle took place, as a result of which, the Cossacks captured the ship and its commander, and his property was confiscated and the slaves on the ship were freed from captivity, then they captured another man and his oxen. Jagiellon's reply to Mengli Giray also mentions that after the attack on the Tatar ship, the Cossacks captured three more people and over a dozen horses in Tiagyn. After a successful attack, Glynsky's Cossacks returned to Ukraine.


Aftermath
Following the attack, Khan Mengli I Geray sent a complaint to the Grand Duke of Lithuania Alexander Jagiellon about the "Circassian actions against the Crimean fleet". On 19 December, Alexander sent a reply letter to him, where he explained that the attack was carried without his knowledge. Next year, as a revenge for the Tatar raid on Cherkasy, Glynsky attacked and destroyed the fortress in Ochakov. This battle is considered to be the first recorded campaign of the Zaporozhian Cossacks.


Legacy
In 1992, a monument commemorating the first Cossack battle against the Ottoman Empire was installed in the village.


Notes


References

Ramesh Prasad Yadav (Nepali: रमेश प्रसाद यादव) is a Nepali politician belonging to Nepal Socialist Party. Yadav is a former member of National Assembly. Since 2022, Yadav has served as the general secretary of the Baburam Bhattarai-led Nepal Socialist Party.


References

Rami (Arabic: رامي) is a village situated in the Suwayda District of Suwayda Governorate, in southern Syria. According to the Syria Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS), Rami had a population of 1,432 in the 2004 census. Its inhabitants are predominantly Druze.


See also
Druze in Syria


References

Rapture is an orchestral composition in one movement by the American composer Christopher Rouse.  The work was commissioned by the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra and was completed January 9, 2000.  It is dedicated to then Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra music director Mariss Jansons and premiered in May 2000.


Composition
Rapture is markedly more tonal than Rouse's earlier compositions.  In the program notes to the score, Rouse commented, "With the exception of my Christmas work, Karolju, this is the most unabashedly tonal music I have composed. I wished to depict a progression to an ever more blinding ecstasy, but the entire work inhabits a world devoid of darkness -- hence the almost complete lack of sustained dissonance."  The piece is also built around "gradually increasing tempi" gains speed over the course of its roughly 11 minutes.
Despite the religious title of the work, Rouse did not intend Rapture to be sacred music.  He further commented, "...the piece is not connected to any specific religious source. Rather, I used the word 'rapture' to convey a sense of spiritual bliss, religious or otherwise."


Instrumentation
Rapture is scored for orchestra comprising three flutes, three oboes, three clarinets, three bassoons, four French horns, four trumpets, four trombones, tuba, harp, timpani (two players), three percussionists (bass drum, five triangles, tam-tam, China cymbal, suspended cymbal, chimes, glockenspiel, and antique cymbals), and strings (violins I & II, violas, violoncellos, and double basses).


Reception
David Gutman of Gramophone gave the piece moderate praise, commenting, "Some readers will welcome its frank neo-romanticism. I wasn’t so sure. The piece is conceived as an increasingly active journey towards an isle of bliss that’s a good deal noisier than Rautavaara’s. In doing so it trades on Sibelian riffs and resonances with less freshness than, say, John Adams’ El Dorado."  Tim Smith of The Baltimore Sun lauded the work, writing:The score starts with low, soft rumbles and questioning melodic flurries that, as tempo and harmonic tension subtly increase, lead inexorably toward an incandescent aural light. There is something communal about the experience, as if the music is trying to pull orchestra and audience alike into some sort of benevolent maelstrom that takes you higher and higher.


References

Red Devil is a census-designated place (CDP) in Bethel Census Area, Alaska, United States. As of the 2020 census, Red Devil had a population of 22. Their post office was founded in 1957.


History
The village was named after the Red Devil Mine, established in 1921 by Hans Halverson when numerous mercury (quicksilver) deposits were discovered in the surrounding Kilbuck-Kuskokwim Mountains. By 1933, the mine was producing substantial quantities of mercury. Although the mine changed ownership twice over the years, it continued to operate until 1971.


Geography
According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of 26.4 square miles (68 km2), of which, 24.2 square miles (63 km2) of it is land and 2.2 square miles (5.7 km2) of it (8.34%) is water.


Demographics

Red Devil first appeared on the 1960 U.S. Census as an unincorporated village. In 1980, it was made a census-designated place (CDP).
As of the census  of 2010, there were 23 people, 12 occupied households, residing in the CDP. The population density was 1.9 inhabitants per square mile (0.73/km2). There were 22 housing units at an average density of 0.9/sq mi (0.4/km2). The racial makeup of the CDP was 17.4% White, 43.5% Native American, and 39.1% from two or more races. The population was spread out, with 2 people under the age of 14, 2 people 15 to 19 and the remaining 19 people were 25 or older. The median income for a household for 2009 in the CDP was $59,886. 40.4% of the population lives beneath the poverty line.


Notable people
Roland Welker (1971–), winner of Alone (TV series) Season 7.


See also
Red Devil Airport


References


External links
History of the Red Devil Mine
Winner of Alone Season 7

Resapamea hedeni is a moth in the family Noctuidae. It is found from southern Europe to Japan.


Subspecies
Resapamea hedeni hedeni (south-eastern Europe, southern Urals, southern Siberia, Inner Mongolia, the Kuriles, Japan: Hokkaido)
Resapamea hedeni rhodochrea (Varga & L. Ronkay, 1992) (western Tien Shan)
Resapamea hedeni takanensis (Marumo, 1932) (Japan: Honshu)
Resapamea hedeni vargai (Hacker, 1988) (eastern Turkey)


References

Restaurant Amusé was a restaurant in East Perth, Western Australia.  It won many awards, including Restaurant of the Year and Best Fine Dining Restaurant in the national finals of the Savour Australia Restaurant and Catering Awards for Excellence 2010.
The restaurant's chef, Hadleigh Troy, was trained by leading Perth chefs Alain Fabregues and Neal Jackson.  He later worked in Michelin-starred restaurants in the United Kingdom, and for Gordon Ramsay.
Restaurant Amusé offered only a degustation menu.  It was given a two star rating, and the award for Restaurant of the Year, by The West Australian Good Food Guide 2013, and retained its two star rating for 2014. The restaurant was also named the best restaurant in Western Australia for eight consecutive years by Gourmet Traveller.
Although the restaurant, owned by Troy and his wife Carolynne, was tipped to fail when it opened, it was phenomenally successful and by 2012 Saturday nights were fully booked at least two months in advance.
After a decade in business the couple chose to close its doors at the end of their lease in 2017 in order to concentrate on family time.


See also

Australian cuisine
Western Australian wine


References


External links
 Media related to Restaurant Amusé at Wikimedia Commons

Goodfood: Restaurant Amusé Archived 3 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine – review of the restaurant by Jenna Clarke
Qantas Travel Insider: Restaurant Amusé, Perth Archived 3 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine – reviews of the restaurant originally published in Qantas The Australian Way
10 Minutes With...Hadleigh and Carolynne Troy – Medical Forum magazine interview of the co-owners
Restaurant Amusé to Close in March

Richard Brooke may refer to:

Richard Brooke (Norton) (died 1569), bought the manor of Norton, near Runcorn, Cheshire
Richard Brooke (physician) (1716–1783), American physician
Richard Brooke (antiquary) (1791–1861), English antiquary
Richard Brooke (priest) (1840–1926), Archdeacon of Cape Town from 1905 until 1926
Richard Brooke (cricketer) (1909–1973), English cricketer and clergyman
Richard Kendall Brooke (1930–1996), South African ornithologist
Richard Brooke (explorer) (1927–2020), British explorer and Royal Naval surveyor
Richard Broke (judge) (died 1529), also written Richard Brooke, baron of the Exchequer
Sir Richard Brooke (multiple) - see Brooke baronets


See also
Richard Broke (disambiguation)
Richard Brook (disambiguation)
Richard Brooks (disambiguation)

Richard Dalton (c. 1715 – 1791) was an English drawer (artist), engraver, and royal librarian. He later became an art dealer.


Life
Born about 1715, he was the younger son of the Rev. John Dalton of Whitehaven in Cumberland; John Dalton, D.D., the poet, was his older brother. He trained as an artist and went to Rome, where he studied under Agostino Masucci.
In 1749, Dalton travelled with Roger Kynaston and John Frederick to Naples, South Italy, and Sicily, where they joined a party consisting of James Caulfeild, 1st Earl of Charlemont, Francis Pierpoint Burton, and others. Dalton then accompanied Charlemont on his tour to Constantinople, Greece, and Egypt.
Dalton managed to obtain the position of librarian to George III when the future king was Prince of Wales, and, after the king's accession, continued in his post through the favour of the Earl of Bute. He was subsequently appointed keeper of the pictures, and antiquarian to his majesty.
Dalton was sent abroad to purchase works of art for the king, such as Carracci's The Madonna and Sleeping Child with the Infant St John the Baptist, acquired in 1766. At Venice in 1763, he made the acquaintance of Francesco Bartolozzi the engraver, and obtained for him an introduction to England as a rival to Sir Robert Strange, a Jacobite (who accused Dalton of using undue influence with the king, in order to assist Bartolozzi). Dalton was one of the original committee who in 1755 drew up the first project for the establishment of a Royal Academy of Fine Arts in England. He was one of the original members of the Incorporated Society of Artists in 1765, and became their treasurer. He purchased a large house in Pall Mall, to be used as a print warehouse; but as this did not succeed he established there the first nucleus of an academy of arts, under the protection of the king, and induced the St. Martin's Lane Academy to transfer its students and equipment there. Dalton later disposed of the premises to James Christie, who set up as an auctioneer there.
Dalton continued to use his influence with the king for the creation of a Royal Academy of Arts, and, when the Royal Academy was really started, he was elected its antiquarian. Dalton died at his rooms in St. James's Palace on 7 February 1791. He was elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1767.


Works

Dalton was the first Englishman to make drawings of the monuments of ancient art in these countries: some of these he etched and engraved himself. A Selection from the Antiquities of Athens was therefore the first publication of its kind, but it was surpassed by the publications of James Stuart and Nicholas Revett. Dalton published some further sets of engravings of Monuments, Manners, Customs in Turkey and Egypt. Dalton was also the first artist to engrave the series of portraits drawn by Hans Holbein, which had been discovered by Queen Caroline at Kensington Palace.


Family
On 25 June 1764, Dalton married Esther Deheulle, a silkweaver from Spitalfields. They had no children.


Notes

Attribution
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Lee, Sidney, ed. (1901). "Dalton, Richard". Dictionary of National Biography (1st supplement). Vol. 2. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Richbod was a Frankish monk and prelate who was the Abbot of Lorsch from 784 and Abbot of Mettlach and Archbishop of Trier from around 792, holding all three of these positions concurrently. He is first documented as a monk in the Lorsch monastery, where he worked as a document clerk. After, he would be noticed and picked up as a student of Alcuin at the court of Charlemagne. Whilst under king he would rise to role of advisor and be awarded the titles of:


Richbod's Love of Vergil
In the court's inner circle, where the learned assumed ancient names associated with wise men, he was Macarius. He was regarded as a man wise before God and popular with men. According to Alcuin, he was a great admirer of Vergil, whose Aeneid he was reputed to know better than the Gospels.

In the recovered 'Letters of Alcuin' we see that the teacher would try and contact his student often however, Richbod would rarely reply: "Lo, a whole year has passed," he writes, "and I have had no letter from you. Ah, if only my name were Vergil, then wouldst thou never forget me, but have my face ever before thee; then should I be 'felix nimium, quo non felicior ullus.' And," he concludes, "would that the four Gospels rather than the twelve Aeneids filled your heart." The idea of Richbod showing clear preference towards Vergil over the Gospel or even his friends, was a controversial point as the stories of the Aeneid revolved around pagan gods and unsophisticated cultures (according to the Franks). This gave the impression that sympathising with the works of Vergil would be like sympathising with the pagans and barbarians, which was a very heretical accusation.
It is also plausible that Richbod would contribute to the schools in Trier and in the court with this vast knowledge of Greek and Latin classics.


Involvement with the Lorsch Annals
Richbod's involvement with the 'Annales Laureshamenses' is disputed, as his name is never directly attributed to the Annals, however historians award him with writing this source for a number of reasons. First of all, the Annals would have specific details on Duke Tassilo III's exile that would only be privy to council members:"[...]The Reviser could not risk a remark that might jeopardize its validity. The wisdom of his reticence is validated by the Lorsch Annals, written under Archbishop Richbod, undoubtedly a participant at Frankfurt, which contain the only independent reference to Tassilo at the great council [...]"Another point would be the fact that the Lorsch Annals would be written by a person who was used to the customs and works of the Carolingian Court which is reflected in the source. An interesting point about these specific Annals would be that the Latin used with have a number of errors, something that may have occurred if Richbod had commissioned the Lorsch Annals to be written by a scribe(s)."[...] the author of the AL ad a. 8oo-8o1 fashioned the text of the annals not only on the basis of his own familiarity with the formulaic phraseology of the Frankish placitum, but also on the basis of 'official protocols' that were accessible to him for his report on the Roman Synod of December 800 and on the negotiations leading to the coronation of Charlemagne on December 25 [...]"Unfortunately, another coincidence that may link Richbod to the Lorsch Annals would be that the Annals finish in the year 803, less than a year before his untimely death in October 804. If we are to assume his death may have been to old age or illness, it would explain why he could no longer help with the creation of his project.


Other Key Points
In 798, he drew up a response to the adoptionist heresy of Felix of Urgel.
Other than this, his actions as archbishop are obscure. In Lorsch, however, he transferred the dormitory from the north to the south and surrounded it with a wall. Furthermore, he surrounded the tomb of Saint Nazarius with a gold and silver lattice and a colourful new marble floor.


Death
He died in Trier and was buried in the abbey at Lorsch.


References


Sources
Chronicon Laureshamense. Mon. Germ. hist. Ss. 21, 352
Epistolae Alcuini. Bibliotheca rer. Germ. VI. Jaffé. epp. 13
Haarländer, Stephanie, "Ricbod" in: Neue Deutsche Biographie 21 (2003), p. 502 [online version]; URL: https://www.deutsche-biographie.de/pnd103115188.html
Hammer, Carl I. (2008). ""PIPINUS REX": PIPPIN'S PLOT OF 792 AND BAVARIA". Traditio. 63: 235–276. ISSN 0362-1529.
Page, Rolph Barlow, "Letters of Alcuin" (1909), p. 73-75; URL: https://archive.org/details/lettersofalcuin00pagerich/page/74/mode/2up?q=richbod
Story, Joanna (2012). "Bede, Willibrord and the Letters of Pope Honorius I on the Genesis of the Archbishopric of York". The English Historical Review. 127 (527): 783–818. ISSN 0013-8266.
Wallach, Luitpold (1956). "The Roman Synod of December 800 and the Alleged Trial of Leo III: A Theory and the Historical Facts". The Harvard Theological Review. 49 (2): 123–142. ISSN 0017-8160.

Ringer's lactate solution (RL), also known as sodium lactate solution or Lactated Ringer's (LR), is a mixture of sodium chloride, sodium lactate, potassium chloride, and calcium chloride in water. It is used for replacing fluids and electrolytes in those who have low blood volume or low blood pressure. It may also be used to treat metabolic acidosis and to wash the eye following a chemical burn. It is given by intravenous infusion or applied to the affected area. It is very similar to Hartmann's solution and the two solutions are often used interchangeably.
Side effects may include allergic reactions, high blood potassium, hypervolemia, and high blood calcium. It may not be suitable for mixing with certain medications and some recommend against use in the same infusion as a blood transfusion. Ringer's lactate solution has a lower rate of acidosis as compared with normal saline. Use is generally safe in pregnancy and breastfeeding. Ringer's lactate solution is in the crystalloid family of medications. It is isotonic, i.e. it has the same tonicity as blood.
Ringer's solution was invented in the 1880s by British clinician, physiologist and pharmacologist Sydney Ringer; lactate was added in the 1930s. It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. Lactated Ringer's is available as a generic medication.  For people with  liver dysfunction, Ringer's acetate may be a better alternative with the lactate replaced by acetate. In Scandinavia, Ringer's acetate is typically used.


Medical uses
Ringer's lactate solution is commonly used for fluid resuscitation after blood loss due to trauma or surgery.
It is extensively used in aggressive volume resuscitation, e.g. for patients with pancreatitis, hemorrhagic shock or major burn injuries. Since the lactate is converted into bicarbonate, caution should be used as patients may become alkalotic. In acidotic states, such as in acute kidney failure, Ringer's lactate solution may be advantageous as the byproducts of lactate metabolism in the liver counteract the acidosis. In a large-volume resuscitation over several hours, Ringer's lactate solution maintains a more stable blood pH than normal saline.
Ringer's lactate and other crystalloid fluids are also used as vehicles for the intravenous (IV) delivery of medications.


Chemistry
One liter of Ringer's lactate solution contains:

130–131 mEq of sodium ion = 130 mmol L−1
109–111 mEq of chloride ion = 109 mmol L−1
28–29 mEq of lactate ion = 28 mmol L−1
4–5 mEq of potassium ion = 4 mmol L−1
2–3 mEq of calcium ion = 1.5 mmol L−1
Ringer's lactate has an osmolarity of 273 mOsm L−1 and a pH of 6.5. The lactate is metabolized into bicarbonate by the liver, which can help correct metabolic acidosis. Ringer's lactate solution alkalinizes via its consumption in the citric acid cycle, the generation of a molecule of carbon dioxide which is then excreted by the lungs.  They increase the strong ion difference in solution, leading to proton consumption and an overall alkalinizing effect.
The solution is formulated to have concentrations of potassium and calcium that are similar to the ionized concentrations found in normal blood plasma. To maintain electrical neutrality, the solution has a lower level of sodium than that found in blood plasma or normal saline.
Generally, the source of the constituent ions is a mixture of sodium chloride (NaCl), sodium lactate (CH3CH(OH)CO2Na), calcium chloride (CaCl2), and potassium chloride (KCl), dissolved into distilled water.  Ringer's solution has the same constituents without the sodium lactate, though sometimes it may also include magnesium chloride (MgCl2).
There are slight variations for the composition for Ringer's as supplied by different manufacturers. As such, the term Ringer's lactate should not be equated with one precise formulation.


History
Ringer's saline solution was invented in the early 1880s by Sydney Ringer, a British physician and physiologist. Ringer was studying the beating of an isolated frog heart outside of the body.  He hoped to identify the substances in blood that would allow the isolated heart to beat normally for a time. The use of Ringer's original solution of inorganic salts slowly became more popular. In the 1930s, the original solution was further modified by American pediatrician Alexis Hartmann for the purpose of treating acidosis. Hartmann added lactate, which mitigates changes in pH by acting as a buffer for acid. Thus the solution became known as "Ringer's lactate solution" or "Hartmann's solution".


Formulations
Ringer's solution technically refers only to the saline component, without lactate. Some countries instead use a Ringer's acetate solution or Ringer-acetate, which has similar properties. It was thought to be helpful for analyzing blood-lactate, however it has been shown that lactate is metabolized much faster than infused. Ringers lactate should not cause an elevated blood-lactate level except possibly in the most severe presentations of liver failure.


Veterinary use
It is used for the treatment or palliative care of chronic kidney failure in small animals. The solution can be administered intravenously or subcutaneously. Administering the fluids subcutaneously allows the solution to be readily given to the animal by a trained layperson, as it is not required that a vein be located. The solution is slowly absorbed from beneath the skin into the bloodstream of the animal.


See also
Banana bag
Intravenous therapy
Oral rehydration therapy
Phosphate buffered saline (cell culture)
Tyrode's solution


References


External links
"Ringer's lactate". Drug Information Portal. U.S. National Library of Medicine. 16 August 2022. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019.

Robert J. K. Jacob is an American computer scientist and professor at Tufts University, known for his work on eye tracking and the Reality-Based Interaction framework for post-WIMP interfaces. He was elected to the ACM SIGCHI Academy in 2007 and named an ACM Fellow in 2016.


Early life and education
Jacob grew up in Brooklyn, New York. He attended Johns Hopkins University, earning a B.A. in 1972, an M.S.E. in 1973, and a Ph.D. in 1976, in Electrical Engineering. His dissertation used computer-generated Chernoff faces to encode multivariate data; each facial feature encoded a different piece of information, which he found to aid the rapid visual parsing of quantitative datasets.


Career
After Johns Hopkins, Jacob worked in the Human-Computer Interaction Lab at the United States Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, D.C. During this time, he also taught computer science at George Washington University. He then joined Tufts University, where he is a professor in the Department of Computer Science and leads research at the Human-Computer Interaction Lab.


Research


Eye movement-based interfaces
At the Naval Research Laboratory, Jacob investigated eye tracking as an input modality for human-computer interfaces. He identified the "Midas Touch problem" with eye movement-controlled interfaces: because users must look around to perceive an interface, gaze-based systems cannot distinguish intentional commands from simple visual scanning. He rejected blinks as a trigger and found dwell time more practical than button presses.
He later extended this work into a broader survey of eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability research.


Reality-Based Interaction
At Tufts, Jacob contributed to research on tangible interaction. He co-authored a framework for token-and-constraint systems that described how physical objects can represent and manipulate digital information.
In 2006, he organized a workshop at CHI to identify commonalities among emerging interaction styles. He named the framework "Reality-Based Interaction", under which grouped a seemingly unrelated set of emerging post-WIMP interface technologies, including multi-touch screens and emotion-reading systems, under four underlying themes: naïve physics, body awareness, environmental awareness, and social awareness. The framework proposed that interfaces drawing on users' existing knowledge of the physical world could reduce the cognitive cost of learning to use them.


Recognition
Jacob was inducted into the SIGCHI Academy in 2007. He was named an ACM Fellow in 2016 "for contributions to human-computer interaction, particularly new interaction modes and novel user interface software formalisms."


Selected publications


References


External links

Robert J. K. Jacob at Tufts University
Robert J. K. Jacob at the ACM Digital Library
Tufts Human-Computer Interaction Lab

Rona Pondick (born April 18, 1952) is an American sculptor. She lives and works in New York City. Using the language of the body in her sculpture, in both a literal and a metaphorical sense, has been of interest to Pondick since the beginnings of her career in 1977. An abiding concern of hers has been the exploration of the use of different materials, a consistent motif that runs throughout her work from its beginnings to the present day.


Early life
Raised in Brooklyn, New York, Rona Pondick earned her Bachelor of Fine Arts from Queens College in New York in 1974. She earned a Master of Fine Arts in 1977 from Yale University School of Art in New Haven, Connecticut, where she studied sculpture with David Von Schlegell, an American sculptor, and also studied with Richard Serra, who was a visiting artist in the program at the time.


Artistry
Pondick began to exhibit in galleries and museums in the mid 1980s, and since that time her sculpture and site-specific installations have been shown in exhibitions throughout the world. Her work can be divided into two stylistic periods: early work based on fragments that reference the human body, and later work centered around the human body as part of hybrid sculptures, merged with forms from nature of flora and fauna.


Color
In 2018, Lynn Zelevansky wrote, “Color … enhances the informality and approachability of Pondick’s new work. Each object is named for the colors it contains. Her palette begins with the primary hues for photographic printing—magenta, cyan, and yellow—to which she adds green, blue, black, and white. Made from resin, acrylic, and an epoxy modeling compound…they are each partly translucent and in places almost evanescent, changing as the light changes and as viewers move around them…  The addition of color and the new materials significantly alter the visual impact and emotional tenor of Pondick’s art.” 


Artist's technique
In her sculpture, Pondick has always used traditional methods such as carving, hand-modeling, mold-making, and metal casting, and at times, has used the latest in 3D computer technologies occasionally for modeling but largely for scaling. This results in a mystery in the process, and it is often hard to discern how these objects are made.


Early work: fragments
Beginning with work from the early 1980s, Pondick has worked with fragments that invoke the body, including shoes, baby bottles, and teeth, “a quirky vocabulary of anatomical parts and body related objects that had some of Louise Bourgeois' oddity and near-surrealism and Philip Guston’s poignant, ambiguous symbolism.” These early provocative works have included scatological references in bodily assemblages. Her early work has been interpreted by critics in numerous ways, as a feminist critique of Freudian theories of sexuality, as an expression of infantile and juvenile desires, and as “Freudian vaudeville acts designed to make you laugh until you feel something caught in your throat.”
Her earliest sculptures are unmistakably scatalogical. From the late 1980s to early 1990s, Pondick made sculptures of beds using pillows, cloth, and wood, some with baby bottles strapped to them with rope.


Later work


Hybrid sculptures: Animals/Flora and the Body
Beginning in 1998, Pondick began to make sculptures that merged parts of animals and flora with those of her own body, primarily casting them in bronze or stainless steel. Pondick merged traditional hand modeling with computer technology in order to create these hybrid sculptures, which incorporate depictions of her own head and hands. For example, in her first work in the series, Dog (1998-2001), she combined a human head and hands with the body of a dog, creating a sphinx-like figure. Other human-animal hybrids include Cat, Otter, Muskrat. Monkeys, and Ram's Head. As Pondick stated, "I use the animal form because it is recognizable and holds its scale no matter where you put it."


Hybrid sculptures: Trees and the Body
In 1995, Pondick made her first sculpture of a tree using fruit scattered on the ground that incorporated human teeth. Her first tree/human hybrid sculpture incorporated the artist's miniaturized head as buds in the tree branches, using aluminum, bronze, and stainless steel. Her first tree/human hybrid sculpture was Pussy Willow Tree in 2001, commissioned by Fondation pour l’art contemporain Claudine et Jean-Marc Salomon in Annecy, France. This was followed by Cranbrook Art Museum's commission of Crimson Queen Maple in 2003, and by Head in Tree, commissioned by Sonsbeek International in 2008 and installed in the center of a pond. A sub category: “Magenta Swimming in Yellow” by Rona Pondick, 2015–17. Pigmented resin and acrylic.(Zevitas Marcus). Rona Pondick's sculptures at Zevitas Marcus gallery are both serene and nightmarish. The artist makes casts of her own head in brightly colored resins, then perches them atop tiny, atrophied bodies, or embeds them in clear cubes or plinths of contrasting color. The results are bizarre by intriguing moments suspended in time.


Awards and grants
2020: American Academy of the Arts and Letters Purchase Award
2016: Anonymous Was a Woman Award
2000: Cultural Department of the City of Salzburg, Kunstlerhaus
1999: Bogliasco Foundation Fellowship
1996: Rockefeller Foundation Fellowship
1992: Guggenheim Fellowship
1991: Mid-Atlantic Arts Grant
1988: Art Matters Inc., New York State Council on the Arts (for Beds installation), Artists Space Grant
1985: Ludwig Vogelstein Foundation Grant
1977: Fannie B. Pardee Prize in Sculpture


Solo museum exhibitions
This list includes material from Landau, Stoops, Van Der Zijpp, Weiermair, and Zaya.

2022-23: Österreichische Galerie Belvedere, Vienna, Austria
2017-18: Bates College Museum of Art, Lewiston, Maine
2017: Utah Museum of Contemporary Art, Salt Lake City, Utah
2010: Nassau County Museum of Art, Roslyn, New York
2009: Worcester Art Museum, Worcester, Massachusetts
2008 TR3, Ljubljana, Slovenia
2008 International Mozarteum Foundation (Die Internationale Stiftung Mozarteum), Salzburg, Austria
2004: Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio
2003: Cranbrook Art Museum, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan
2002: DeCordova Museum and Sculpture Park, Lincoln, Massachusetts
2002: Bologna Museum of Modern Art (MAMbo, or Museo d’Arte Moderna di Bologna), Bologna, Italy
2002: Groninger Museum, Groningen, Netherlands
1999: Rupertinum Museum für moderne und zeitgenössische Kunst, Salzburg, Austria
1999-97: Brooklyn Museum of Art, Brooklyn, New York
1995: Cincinnati Art Museum, Cincinnati, Ohio
1992: The Israel Museum, Jerusalem
1991: Beaver College of Art Gallery, Glenside, Pennsylvania
1989: The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, Massachusetts
1988: SculptureCenter, New York City
Aside from participating in exhibitions, she also lectured at universities and institutions such as Yale University, Princeton, Columbia, and even Bezalel, Academy of Arts & Design in Israel and Palais des Beaux Arts de Lille in France.


International museum exhibitions
Pondick's work has been included in international exhibitions including the Lyon, Venice, and Johannesburg Biennales, the Whitney Biennial, and Sonsbeek.


Museum collections
Pondick's work is represented in museum collections including The Allen Memorial Art Museum at Oberlin College, The Brooklyn Museum, The Carnegie Museum of Art, Centre Georges Pompidou, Cleveland Museum of Art, The DeCordova Museum and Sculpture Park, The Fogg Art Museum/Harvard Art Museums, The High Museum of Art, The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), The Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, The Museum of Modern Art, The Morgan Library and Museum, Nasher Sculpture Center, The National Gallery of Art, The New Orleans Museum of Art, The New York Public Library, The Rose Art Museum, The Toledo Museum of Art, The Whitney Museum, and The Worcester Art Museum.


Bibliography
2018 – Rona Pondick: Works 2013-2018. Marc Straus, New York; Zevitas Marcus, Los Angeles. 2018. ISBN 978-0692-14302-5.
2017 – Rona Pondick and Robert Feintuch: Head, Hands, Feet; Sleeping, Holding, Dreaming, Dying. Bates College Museum of Art, Lewiston, Maine. ISBN 978-0-9773570-3-1.
2009 – Rona Pondick: The Metamorphosis of an Object. Worcester Art Museum, Worcester, Massachusetts. 2009. ISBN 978-0-936042-20-6.
2008 – Rona Pondick: Works / Werke 1986-2008, New York, Salzburg. Internationale Sommerakademie fur Bildende Kunst, Salzburg; Galerie Thaddaeus Ropac, Paris / Salzburg; Sonnabend Gallery, New York. 2008. ISBN 978-3-901369-32-2.
2008 – Rona Pondick: Head in Tree and Other Works, 1999-2008. TR3, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
2004 – Rona Pondick: 1987-2001. Akira Ikeda Gallery, Taura, Japan.
2002 – Rona Pondick, Works 1986-2001. Sonnabend Press, New York. 2002. ISBN 0-9713411-1-7.
1992-1993 – Rona Pondick, Pink and Brown. The Israel Museum, Jerusalem. 1992. ISBN 965-278-114-2.


References


External links
Entry for Rona Pondick on the Union List of Artist Names
Official site of the artist
"Rona Pondick: The Metamorphosis of an Object" Archived 2012-04-14 at the Wayback Machine- 2009 exhibit at the Worcester Art Museum
Rona Pondick in Conversation with Phong Bui (March 2013)
2009 Bomb Magazine interview of Rona Pondick by Shirley Kaneda Archived 2015-06-11 at the Wayback Machine
The Artist Project, The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Rona Pondick on Egyptian sculptural fragments
Neil, Jonathan. “A Conversation with Artist Rona Pondick.” Sotheby’s Institute of Art, YouTube, 31 January 2019

The Root River flows for 80 miles (130 km) through the Driftless Area of southeastern Minnesota and is a tributary of the Upper Mississippi River. The Root River is formed by three branches, the North, South and Middle branches of the Root River and the South Fork Root River. It is an excellent river for canoeing and fishing. The gentle to moderate flowing river drops an average of 3.4 ft/mile from Chatfield, Minnesota, to its pour point in the Mississippi River into Navigation Pool 7 just south of La Crosse, Wisconsin and east of Hokah, Minnesota.


History and description
Root River is an English translation of the Dakota-language name Hokah.
The Root River is formed by the merger of the North Branch Root River and Middle Branch Root River in Chatfield, Minnesota. A mile and a half north of Lanesboro, Minnesota it is joined by the South Branch Root River.  The South Fork Root River later joins the Root River near Houston, Minnesota.
The South Branch Root River rises in Mower County as agricultural drainage ditches, which disappear underground, re-emerging as a much cooler stream at Mystery Cave near Preston, Minnesota. 
The Root River and its tributaries lie within Minnesota's Driftless Area.


Fish and wildlife
Many fish species such as brook trout, rainbow trout, brown trout, smallmouth bass, rock bass, channel catfish,  crappies, shorthead redhorse, river redhorse, golden redhorse, silver redhorse, shovelnose sturgeon, greater redhorse, black redhorse, northern hogsuckers, and white suckers inhabit the river. The Root River system provides habitat to a number of bird species. Red-tailed hawks and bald eagles can be found in the area. Blue herons, wild turkeys, and wood ducks are also commonly seen. Numerous mammals can be spotted in the region including deer, gray fox, red fox, coyotes, raccoons, squirrels, and badgers.


Trail
The Root River State Trail is a 42-mile-long (68 km) trail for bicycling, hiking, skating, skiing, etc. It begins in Fountain and continues through Lanesboro, Whalan, Peterson, Rushford, and Houston.


2007 flood
As a result of the 2007 Midwest flooding, the river rose to  19 feet (5.8 m), about a foot short of the height of the dike protecting the town of Houston.


Gallery


Maps


See also

List of Minnesota rivers
List of longest streams of Minnesota


References


External links
Minnesota DNR canoeing guide for the Root River
Minnesota DNR trail guide for the Root River State Trail.

Rosa sherardii (syn. Rosa omissa), the northern downy rose or Sherard's downy-rose, is a species of flowering plant in the family Rosaceae. A shrub reaching 2 m (7 ft), it is native to cooler parts of Europe, and has been introduced to the US state of Vermont. In the garden it prefers a sheltered location in full sun with moist but well-drained soil. More compact than Rosa tomentosa, its grey-leaved form in particular is considered under-represented in cultivation.


References

The Rosmalen Open, called the Libéma Open (sponsored by Libéma)  is a professional tennis tournament held in the town of Rosmalen, on the outskirts of the city of 's-Hertogenbosch (Den Bosch) in the Netherlands. The men's and women's tennis matches are played on grass courts at the Autotron event venue. It is classified as an ATP 250 event on the ATP Tour and a WTA 250 event on the WTA Tour. 
It was formerly known as the Continental Grass Court Championships, Heineken Trophy, Ordina Open, UNICEF Open, Topshelf Open and RICOH Open.
In 1989 a two-group round robin invitational tournament with eight players was organized in Rosmalen which was won by Miloslav Mečíř. The next year, 1990, the tournament became part of the newly founded ATP Tour and was officially called the Continental Grass Court Championships. At the time of its founding it was the only grass court event held in continental Europe. The tournament is used by tennis pros as a preparation for the Wimbledon Championships and was held the week prior to Wimbledon until 2014. From 2015 onwards it is held the week following the French Open. In 1996, a women's singles and doubles event dubbed Wilkinson Championships was added to the tournament.


Past finals


Men's singles


Women's singles


Men's doubles


Women's doubles


Notes


References


External links
Libema Open ATP
's-Hertogenbosch Libema Open WTA 
Official website

Roy Oxley (9 March 1905 – 1980) was a production designer at BBC Television who became famous after the BBC chose him to model for a photograph to be shown during their adaptation of George Orwell's novel Nineteen Eighty-Four.
Oxley began working in set design in 1948, as an art decorator in the film London Belongs to Me. He also supervised the art decoration of the 1949 film, Passport to Pimlico.
Oxley had been working for some years as set decorator for BBC when he was chosen, as an in-house joke, to model for the character of "Big Brother" in Nineteen Eighty-Four. "Big Brother" was not actually a participating character in the programme; his face was only shown on various posters and billboards seen during the adaptation.
Oxley worked at several other productions as a production designer with the BBC, including seven episodes of the Douglas Wilmer version of Sherlock Holmes, various episodes of Z-Cars and an adaptation for television of Dylan Thomas's Under Milk Wood. In 1969, he won a BAFTA Award for Production Design for his work of the BBC play The Portrait of a Lady.


Personal life
He was married to Gladys Jean Jones; they had two children.


References


External links
Roy Oxley at IMDb
Roy Oxley at the British Film Institute
http://media.gettyimages.com/photos/portrait-of-bbc-production-designer-roy-oxley-made-famous-for-playing-picture-id515819255

Ruban Nielson (born 20 February 1980) is a New Zealand musician, singer and songwriter, and the frontman of the psychedelic rock band Unknown Mortal Orchestra. He has won two Aotearoa Music Awards, an APRA Silver Scroll, and a Taite Music Prize over the course of his band's five studio albums and one extended play.
Born in Darwin, Australia, to a Hawaiian mother, Nielson was raised in Orewa, Auckland in a musical family. Nielson attended Elam, and graduated in 2002 as a recipient of the Sir James Wallace art award, one year after forming The Mint Chicks with Paul Roper, Michael Logie and his brother Kody Nielson. The four members met at Orewa College, although the band started moving between Portland, Oregon, where Nielson would later be based, and Auckland. The band, known for its nihilistic ideology, disorderly behaviour and  neo-punk elements, broke up following Ruban's departure. Nielson subsequently  formed a more experimental and psychedelic band, Unknown Mortal Orchestra, with musician Jake Portrait. His brother Kody also has performed drums on almost every Unknown Mortal Orchestra album.
Nielson achieved critical acclaim and success worldwide with the band's self-titled debut album Unknown Mortal Orchestra, released in 2011. The album won the 2012 Taite Music Prize. Further success came with II, released in 2013. Nielson's third album Multi-Love, which made it high onto lists by The Guardian, NME and Consequence of Sound for the best albums of 2015. Singles "Multi-Love" and "Can't Keep Checking My Phone" were both A-listed at BBC's 6 Music. Two more albums, Sex + Food, and the instrumental IC-01 Hanoi, followed in 2018.
Nielson lives in the United States with his family. He has become part of the revival of psychedelic music in Australasia, alongside the likes of Tame Impala, Connan Mockasin, LEISURE and Pond. NME has summed up Nielson as a master in creating "works of warm, fuzzy beauty."


Early life
Nielson was born in Darwin, Australia on 20 February 1980. His mother is an American hula dancer from Oahu, Hawaii and his father is New Zealand Māori brass player and Elam School of Fine Arts alumni, Chris Nielson, who toured with lounge singer John Rowles in the 1970s and has played in New Zealand bands such as Katchafire. With his mother being a Native Hawaiian woman (Kānaka Maoli), there was an instant cultural connection with Nielson's Māori father; the two ethnic groups are closely connected. The two met on tour in Los Angeles, and later had another son, Kody (born 9 May 1982), who later became a musician alongside Nielson. The transpacific couple moved to Auckland when Nielson was young, where he grew up and regards as his home. Chris Nielson collaborated with his sons on Unknown Mortal Orchestra's 2018 album, IC-01 Hanoi, playing the flügelhorn and saxophone.
Nielson grew up in Orewa. Home life was difficult due to his father's chronic alcoholism and heroin addiction, and the fallout from his parents' separation. As a teenager, Nielson developed insomnia, and was unable to sleep at night; this affected his academic performance. Despite his addictions, his father cared for his children, and felt guilty about his illnesses and choices affecting them. As he weaned himself off heroin and alcohol, he made amends with his son by buying him his first guitar and getting recommendations from his Orewa College teachers to get him into Elam School of Fine Arts, New Zealand's most prestigious art school. He graduated in 2002 with distinction, winning a Sir James Wallace art award. When listed in the University of Auckland's 40 under 40 list in 2020, Nielson said of his father and Elam:
"His stories of Elam when I was a kid really stoked my desire to be there. He helped me get into Elam and negotiate what was originally a kind of ‘probational situation’ with my acceptance. Being at Elam really fulfilled a childhood dream and people like Nuala Gregory, Peter Shand, Jim Speers, Leigh Martin, Judy Millar and Denys Watkins as well as many others all had a huge impact on the way I see the world and creativity.”
He maintains an interest in the visual arts, and says that if he had not entered music as a profession he would have become a visual artist.


The Mint Chicks (2001–10)
The Nielson brothers, Ruban and Kody, enjoyed making music together from a young age, despite their sibling rivalry and difficult home life. Ruban found it as a way to cope with his worsening insomnia, while the younger Kody enjoyed daredevil stunts and being a loud and anarchic frontman. The brothers formed the band in high school in 2001, alongside two friends, Michael Logie and Paul Roper. They began by playing punk house parties and low profile shows before being discovered by the internationally acclaimed New Zealand independent record label Flying Nun Records. The Mint Chicks, a neo-punk and "shit-gaze" band, were famed for their noisy, rowdy shows (with Kody Nielson often hanging himself upside down from the stage).They released two EPs and three albums under the Flying Nun Records banner: Octagon, Octagon, Octagon EP (2003), Anti-Tiger EP (2004), Fuck the Golden Youth (2005), Crazy? Yes! Dumb? No! (2006) and Screens (2009), as well as one EP on a minor label, Bad Buzz (2010). All were produced and recorded by the band's core members Ruban and Kody Nielson, with the exception of Crazy? Yes! Dumb? No! which was produced by the Nielson brothers and their father Chris Nielson at two different home studios.
All four original band members met at Orewa College in Orewa, New Zealand, although the band starting moving between Portland, Oregon and Auckland, as the Nielson brothers have dual citizenship in New Zealand and the U.S.

In 2006, the band played support for the Yeah Yeah Yeahs. The volume of the show was reportedly so loud that part of the St James theatre complex fell down, injuring two concert goers. They have also played support slots for The White Stripes, Death From Above 1979, TV on the Radio, The Blood Brothers, The Black Lips, and The Bronx. They were also part of the New Zealand line-up for Big Day Out 2004, 2005, 2007 and 2009. In 2005, it was notable that Kody Nielson wielded a chainsaw on stage and destroyed a corporate sponsor's overly prominent sign with it.
At the 2007 New Zealand Music Awards the band won five Tui awards including best rock group, best album, best rock album as well as winning best album cover and best music video for the single "Crazy? Yes! Dumb? No!".
On 24 October 2007, it was announced on the band's website that their bassist Michael Logie would leave the band when they relocated to Portland. The group continued as a trio, with Logie relocating to London, England. The band played a free show in Portland on 29 June 2008, in which they played their then-upcoming third album from beginning to end live. The band later supported Shihad on the July 2008 Beautiful Machine Tour and tested their new songs in front of a home audience. As a result of their bass player having left the band, the Mint Chicks weren't able to play hits from earlier songs, angering some fans. To counter this Shihad's bass player, Karl Kippenberger, filled in for several more popular songs.
On 25 December 2008, The Mint Chicks released the Mintunes EP consisting of "8-bit versions" of both previously released songs and tracks from the upcoming album. The band also released an iTunes-only single during 2008, "Life Will Get Better Some Day", a teaser for the album "Screens", which was released in New Zealand on 16 March 2009 after having been recorded sporadically over the preceding two years.
In October 2009 the Mint Chicks performed a rendition of Ray Columbus and the Invaders' classic hit She's a Mod at the New Zealand Music awards as a four-piece band, later released as a standalone single. Shortly afterwards on 16 October 2009, it was announced Michael Logie would be rejoining the band in a post on the band's Twitter. The band joined with New Zealand music website MusicHy.pe to promote their next record, the Bad Buzz EP, released in February 2010.
Shortly after the release of the EP, the band played their final show on 12 March 2010. The show, originally a fundraiser for MusicHy.pe, ended in chaos after Kody Nielson destroyed the two drumkits and equipment, imploring the crowd to 'start your own fucking band'.


Unknown Mortal Orchestra
Nielson left The Mint Chicks in the beginning of 2010, citing a loss of interest in the group's music. Following an incident during one of the band's live performances and Nielson's subsequent departure, The Mint Chicks broke up. Nielson had already returned to Portland, Oregon, where he began working at a film production company as an illustrator. He quickly found himself wanting to write and record music again and began searching for "psychedelic records with lost tunes" for inspiration. Nielson had become very specific about what type of record he wanted to find for inspiration and, with that specificity, began making that record himself instead. Once he had finished writing and recording the first song, Nielson uploaded it anonymously on May 17, 2010, onto Bandcamp under the name "Ffunny Ffrends". Within a day, the song had received significant coverage from independent music blogs such as Pitchfork.
Nielson maintained the band's anonymity as he was not sure what he wanted the band to be and did not want to "face up to Mint Chicks fans and to people who were looking forward to a new Mint Chicks record." Nielson eventually claimed the track under the band name Unknown Mortal Orchestra.
The band's debut self-titled album was released June 21, 2011 on Fat Possum Records. The album quickly received critical acclaim. Pitchfork gave the album an 8.1, describing that with "an expert use of space rare for such a lo-fi record, UMO manages a unique immersive and psychedelic quality without relying on the usual array of bong-ripping effects."


Personal life
Nielson is married to Jenny Nielson, with whom he was previously in a polyamorous relationship with another woman; this courtship was the main inspiration for Multi-Love. He met Jenny during his time at the Elam School of Fine Arts, and the couple moved in together within a few months of their first date. They have two children. The family continued to live in Portland, Oregon, and Nielson, despite being a New Zealander, has said living in the country has added to a feeling of American identity. Nielson later moved with his family to Palm Springs, California. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Ruban began dividing his time between Palm Springs and Hilo, Hawaii, to be close to his mother and uncles. 
Nielson said in response to being described as a musical provocateur; "No, I don't purposefully go out to try and do that......but it is really fun."


Discography


Notes


References


External links
Unknown Mortal Orchestra official website

Rubina Ashraf (Urdu: روبینہ اشرف; born 9 November 1960) is a Pakistani actress, director and producer. She was one of the most popular actresses of the 1980s and 1990s. Rubina appeared in classic PTV dramas such as Kasak, Hazaron Raaste, Sirriyan, Footpath Ki Ghaas, Tapish and Badaltey Mausam. She also appeared in dramas including Khuda Aur Muhabbat Season 3, Uraan, Gul-e-Rana and Do Bol.


Early life and education
Rubina was born on 9 November 1960 in Lahore, Pakistan. She graduated in graphic designing from University of Lahore.


Career


Acting
Rubina started her acting career in 1980, when during a visit to PTV Lahore centre with her friends she met Sahira Kazmi, who cast her in a drama. Then she worked in multiple dramas on PTV including Pas-e-Aaina, Tapish, Badaltey Mausam, Kasak, Footpath Ki Ghaas and Sirriyan.


Drama directing
Rubina directed many dramas including Vaani which received good reviews in 2008 and directed dramas Surkh Chandni, Ek Adh Hafta, Tarazoo and Tere Siwa. Then Rubina directed drama Shikwa in 2014. In 2020, Rubina directed drama Ruswai which became a hit.


Personal life
Rubina married Tariq Mirza and has two children, a son and actress Minna Tariq is her daughter. She was diagnosed with COVID-19 during the COVID-19 pandemic in Pakistan and went into quarantine until she recovered.


Filmography


Television series


Telefilm


Film


Director
Ruswai
Vaani
Shikwa
Surkh Chandni
Tere Siwa
Ek Adh Hafta
Tarazoo


Awards and nominations


References


External links
Rubina Ashraf on Instagram
Rubina Ashraf at IMDb
Rubina Ashraf at the tv.com.pk

Russell Lloyd (16 January 1916 – 21 January 2008) was a British film editor who amassed fifty credits on feature films. Lloyd had a notable collaboration with the director John Huston that extended over eleven films. Lloyd was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Film Editing for Huston's The Man Who Would Be King (1975).
Lloyd's first film with Huston was Moby Dick (1956); Huston was so satisfied with Lloyd's initiative and editing that he subsequently entrusted post-production of the films he directed entirely to Lloyd. Tony Sloman has written, "Lloyd's remarkable relationship with Huston reached its apogee with The Man Who Would Be King (1975) in which the editor's and director's styles meshed seamlessly, for both were opposed to the then (and still) current trend for overcutting action sequences, and there is a tremendous moment of pure cinema when Sean Connery falls to his doom from a collapsing rope bridge in a single shot."
Lloyd had been elected to membership in the American Cinema Editors.


Selected filmography
Whirlpool (1959)


See also
List of film director and editor collaborations


References


External links
Russell Lloyd at the BFI's Screenonline

Régades (French pronunciation: [ʁeɡad]; Occitan: Regadas) is a commune in the Haute-Garonne department in southwestern France.


Population


See also
Communes of the Haute-Garonne department


References

SMK St Joseph Papar is a Malaysian secondary school in Papar, Malaysia. It was established in 1953.


History
In 1953 Rev. Fr. Klijin, a Mill Hill Missionary Priest, started the first Form 1 Class with some 17 students in a room under his residence at the present site of the school. He was the 1st Principal for SJS. The present Principal's office was the living quarters of Father Klijin and the present Senior Assistant for Student Affairs office was Father Klijin's office.


References

STMP may refer to:

Sodium trimetaphosphate (also STMP), a metaphosphate of sodium
Stamps.com (Nasdaq ticker: STMP), an American company that provides Internet-based mailing and shipping services
STEAP2 (alias: STMP), an enzyme that in humans is encoded by the STEAP2 gene
STMP, a chipset series manufactured by SigmaTel

Sabash Babu ( transl. Bravo Babu) is a 1993 Indian Tamil-language action drama film written by T. Rajendar from a story by P. Sankara Narayanan and directed by Sasi Mohan. The films stars Silambarasan appearing in the title role as a child artiste. Heera Rajagopal and Mansoor Ali Khan played supporting roles. The film was released on 13 November 1993.


Plot

Lalitha is tortured by her relatives and made insane to take over her whole property. The rest of the film shows how her son Babu saves his mother with the help of his father Veluchamy, an army officer.


Cast


Soundtrack
The soundtrack was composed by T. Rajender, who also wrote the songs.


Reception
Malini Mannath of The Indian Express wrote the film "is yet another attempt of T. Rajendar to project his son as alter ego". Kalki gave a negative review for the film.


References


External links
Sabash Babu at IMDb 
Sabash Babu at Rotten Tomatoes

Saint-Marc-sur-Seine (French pronunciation: [sɛ̃ maʁk syʁ sɛn] , lit. 'Saint Marc on Seine') is a commune in the Côte-d'Or department in eastern France.


Population


See also
Communes of the Côte-d'Or department


References

Saint James is an unincorporated community in Wheatland Township, Fayette County, Illinois, United States.


Geography
Saint James is located at 38°57′16″N 088°51′04″W, elevated 604 feet.


References

Saladas is a town in Corrientes Province, Argentina. It was established on November 19, 1732 that is 97 km (60 mi) from the provincial capital.
It is the administrative seat of Saladas Department.
Saladas is the birthplace of Juan Bautista Cabral (born 1789), a soldier in the war of independence.


References


External links

Municipal information: Municipal Affairs Federal Institute (IFAM), Municipal Affairs Secretariat, Ministry of Interior, Argentina. (in Spanish)
(in Spanish) Saladas website

Salehabad (Persian: صالح اباد) is a village in Zeri Rural District of Qotur District in Khoy County, West Azerbaijan province, Iran.


Demographics


Population
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the village's population was 123 in 24 households. The following census in 2011 counted 94 people in 21 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the village as 91 people in 25 households.


See also
 Iran portal


Notes


References

The Samjhauta Express (transl. Agreement Express) was a twice-weekly train, Thursday and Monday, that ran between Delhi and Attari in India and  Lahore in Pakistan. In Hindustani (Hindi-Urdu), the word "समझौता/سمجھوتا" (samjhauta) means an "agreement" or an "accord", especially one arising out of a compromise.
Until the reopening of the Thar Express, this was the only rail connection between the two countries. The train was started on 22 July 1976 following the Simla Agreement and ran between Amritsar and Lahore, a distance of about 50.2 km. Following disturbances in Punjab in the late 1980s, due to security reasons Indian Railways decided to terminate the service at Attari, where customs and immigration clearances take place. On 14 April 2000, in an agreement between Indian Railways and Pakistan Railways (PR), the distance was revised to cover just under three km.


History
An earlier train ran between Amritsar and Lahore and vice versa and carried 8,239 persons from India to Pakistan and  10,360 from Pakistan to India from 28 October 1954 to 30 November 1954.
Samjhauta Express was a daily train when the service started in 1976 and changed to a twice-weekly schedule in 1994. Earlier the rakes were returned to the home country the same day but later in 2000 the rake remained overnight at that location.
The train's first break of service was when it was discontinued on 1 January 2002 in the wake of the terrorist attack on the Indian Parliament on 13 December 2001. Service resumed on 15 January 2004. Service was also suspended following the 27 December 2007, assassination of Benazir Bhutto as a preventive measure to deny militants a "high-value target" that was of great symbolic importance to both India and Pakistan.
On 8 October 2012, police recovered about 100 kg of contraband heroin and more than 500 rounds of bullet ammunition at Wagah border on the train heading for Delhi.
On 28 February 2019, the service was suspended following the 2019 India–Pakistan standoff. A spokesman for the Pakistan Foreign Office said that service was suspended "in view of the prevailing tensions between Pakistan and India" while it was reported that India has suspended the running of the train on its side, due to "drastic decline in occupancy" and "the suspension of services from across the border".
On 8 August 2019, the service was suspended by Pakistan following the revocation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir.


Route
Its termini were Lahore in Pakistan and Delhi in India. The border crossing took place between Wagah in Pakistan and Attari in India. Initially, this was a thorough service with the same rake going all the way between the termini; later the Pakistani rake stopped at Attari at which point passengers had to change trains.
Now there was a train from Delhi to Attari where all passengers alighted for customs and immigration. This train did not have any commercial stops between Delhi and Attari. It is incorrectly referred to as the Samjhauta Express and it is officially known as the Delhi–Attari or Attari–Delhi Express. The actual Samjhauta Express ran from Attari to Lahore, although the passengers were checked at Wagah, the first station on the Pakistani side. The train service was set up with an agreement between Indian Railways (IR) and Pakistan Railways (PR) to alternately use an Indian and a Pakistani rake and locomotive for the train, six months at a time.
The train usually had between four and eight coaches. The rake supplied by Pakistan was usually hauled by an Alco DL-543 class ALU20 diesel locomotive (Lahore shed), with the entire train in the standard dark green livery of PR.


Incidents


2007 bombing

In the early hours of 18 February 2007, 70 people (mostly Pakistani civilians and a few Indian military guarding the train) were killed and scores more injured in a terrorist attack on the Delhi–Attari Express. The attack occurred at Diwana station near the Indian city of Panipat, Haryana. Officials found evidence of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) made with RDX, containing fragmentation and flammable material, including three unexploded IEDs. The National Investigation Agency suspected that the blasts were masterminded by Swami Aseemanand, which was dismissed later for lack of evidence.
On 1 July 2009, the US Department of Treasury designated Arif Qasmani of the Lashkar-e Tayyiba as a person involved in terrorism, citing among other things his involvement in the Samjhauta Express bombing.
On 30 December 2010, India's National Investigation Agency claimed that they had solid evidence that Swami Aseemanand was the mastermind behind the blasts. He had taken help from his friend Sandeep Dange, an engineering graduate 
and has done higher study in physics, and Ramji Kalsangra, an electrician, to build the improvised explosive devices used in the blasts. On 8 January 2011, Aseemanand allegedly confessed the bombing of Samjhauta express, a statement later found to be obtained under duress. Later the Hindu nationalist group RSS (Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh) sent a legal notice to CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) accusing it of deliberately leaking Swami Aseemanand's confession in the media. RSS spokesman Ram Madhav called the investigation maligning of organizations and individuals.


References


External links
"India–Pakistan rail link reopens". BBC. 18 February 2006.

Samuel Beatty (December 16, 1820 – May 26, 1885) was an American soldier, sheriff, and farmer from Ohio. He was a brigadier general in the Union Army during the American Civil War. In 1866, he was awarded the brevet grade of major general of volunteers.


Early life and career
Beatty was born in Mifflin County, Pennsylvania in 1820 but was raised on a farm in Stark County, Ohio. Beatty was appointed First Lieutenant in Company K, 3rd Ohio Volunteer Infantry on 25 June 1846 at Cincinnati, Ohio, for service during the Mexican–American War. The regiment was commanded by Colonel Samuel R. Curtis and spent several months guarding the Mexican border near Matamoras. The 3rd Ohio was attached to Zachary Taylor's division in the Army of the Rio Grande commanded by General Winfield Scott. The 3rd Ohio took part in mopping up operations around Monterrey and protecting supply convoys from Mexican irregulars. The 3rd Ohio was relieved from duty on 18 May 1847 and mustered out of service at New Orleans, Louisiana from 18-24 June 1847.
Beatty returned to his family farm in Jackson Township, Stark County, Ohio, after discharge. He was elected Sheriff of Stark County in 1857 and won reelection in 1859. 


Civil War service
When the Civil War erupted, Samuel Beatty helped form a volunteer unit that mustered in as Company A of the 19th Ohio Infantry—the "Canton Light Guards." Beatty was elected as the regiment's first colonel on 29 May 1861 After initial organization and training at the local fairgrounds, the regiment was transported to Camp Chase in Columbus, Ohio, for additional drilling. Beatty led the 19th Ohio in a series of battles in western Virginia, including the Battle of Rich Mountain - where his good conduct was cited in General William Rosecrans' official report. The 19th Ohio was originally mustered for only ninety days so returned to Ohio to muster out in August 1861. 
Beatty and the 19th Ohio (3 years) organized in September 1861 and was attached to the 11th Brigade, Army of the Ohio in December 1861. Beatty commanded a brigade in the Army of the Ohio during the Battle of Shiloh in April 1862, and the subsequent Corinth campaign and  Battle of Perryville in Kentucky in September 1862. His service was recognized by a promotion to brigadier general of volunteers on 29 November 1862.
At the Battle of Stones River, Beatty commanded a brigade in Brig. Gen. Horatio Van Cleve's division of Maj. Gen. Thomas L. Crittenden's left wing.  Van Cleave was wounded during fighting on the first day, so Beatty commanded the division during the remainder of the battle. During the pivotal fighting late on 2 January 1863, Beatty rallied his division after they were driven back by an attack by the division commanded by John C. Breckinridge. Beatty's division ultimately defeated Breckenridge along with the massed fires of Federal artillery gathered by Crittenden's artillery chief, Captain John Mendenhall.
Beatty resumed command of his old brigade which was redesignated 1st Brigade of Van Cleve's 3rd Division, Major General Thomas Crittenden's XXI Army Corps, Army of the Cumberland, commanded by Major General George H. Thomas. Beatty led his brigade through the middle Tennessee campaign that ended with the Battle of Chickamauga in September 1863.  Beatty's brigade fought well during the first and second day until it was caught up in the collapse of the Union line.  Beatty afterwards received the commendation of XXI Corps commander Thomas L. Crittenden, who wrote, "With pride I mention the name of Brig. Gen. Samuel Beatty for his conduct on this occasion."
Beatty's brigade was reorganized as 3rd Brigade, Third Division, under Brigadier General Thomas J. Wood, IV Corps (Major General Gordon Granger), Army of the Cumberland. Beatty's brigade participated in the preliminary battle for Orchard Knob on 23 November 1863, and the pivotal Battle of Missionary Ridge on 25 November 1863. After preliminary attacks by General William T. Sherman at Tunnel Hill failed, General Ulysses S. Grant ordered the Army of the Cumberland to advance on the base of Missionary Ridge. Instead, the junior officers of the Army of the Cumberland, confused by conflicting orders, continued their advance up Missionary Ridge. The men of Wood's division and Beatty's brigade were among the first Federal soldiers to gain the crest of Missionary Ridge, and played a major role in routing the Confederate Army of Tennessee from their positions. Beatty afterwards claimed to have captured eight pieces of artillery with limbers and caisson, 200 small arms, 176 prisoners and the commander and colors of the 42nd Alabama.
Beatty continued on to command the 3rd Brigade, Third Division (Wood), IV Corps,commanded by Major General Oliver Otis Howard, of the Army of the Cumberland, during the Atlanta campaign of 1864. General Beatty continued on in brigade command during the Franklin–Nashville campaign of September-December 1864. Beatty was elevated to command Wood's division, IV Corps, Army of the Cumberland prior to the Battle of Nashville. Beatty's division took part in the diversionary attack on Peach Orchard Hill, setting the stage for the decisive attack on Shy's Hill that crushed the left flank of the Army of Tennessee. 

By nomination of President Andrew Johnson on January 13, 1866 and confirmation by the U.S. Senate on March 12, 1866, he was retroactively awarded the brevet grade of major general of volunteers, to rank from March 13, 1865, for his leadership of the Third Division, IV Corps, Army of the Cumberland during the Nashville campaign. This brevet promotion made him the highest ranking Union Army officer from Stark County.
Beatty was mustered out of the volunteer service on January 15, 1866.


Postbellum career
After the war, Beatty returned to Stark County and farmed in Jackson Township. He died at home on 26 May 1885 and was buried in the City Cemetery in Massillon, Ohio.
Original farmhouse located at 8903 Beatty ST NW MASSILLON, OH 44646. Later deconstructed and put into storage.


See also

List of American Civil War generals (Union)
List of Ohio's American Civil War generals
Ohio in the American Civil War


Notes


References
Eicher, John H., and David J. Eicher, Civil War High Commands. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-8047-3641-3.
Reid, Whitelaw, Ohio in the War: Her Statesmen, Her Generals, and Soldiers. Volume 2. Cincinnati: Moore, Wilstach, & Baldwin, 1868.
U.S. War Department, The War of the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies, 70 volumes in 4 series. Washington, D.C.: United States Government Printing Office, 1880–1901.
Wilson, J. G.; Fiske, J., eds. (1900). "Beatty, Samuel" . Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography. New York: D. Appleton.


External links
 Media related to Samuel Beatty (general) at Wikimedia Commons
National Park Service - Battle of Stones River
"Samuel Beatty". Find a Grave. Retrieved 2008-10-19.

San Juan FC is a Puerto Rican association football club based in San Juan that currently plays in the Liga Puerto Rico Pro. The club also fields youth sides.


Domestic history
Key
  Champion
  Runners-up
  3rd Place


Current squad
As of February 14, 2026

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


References


External links
Official Facebook profile
Global Sports Archive profile

Sandra Magsamen is an American author, artist, art therapist, and designer. She has published over 60 children's books with publishers Scholastic, Sourcebooks and Little Brown and has worked with national department stores, mid-tier, specialty and mass market through her national lifestyle brands From the Studio of Sandra Magsamen, Messages from the Heart, Wishes & Kisses and Treasured to design custom collections. Magsamen has proudly partnered with retailers such as Walmart, JCPenney, Hallmark, Studio-e-fabrics, Bamboozle Homewares and 1-800-Flowers.


Background
Sandra Lee Magsamen was born in Baltimore, Maryland. Magsamen's maternal great-grandfather and great-uncle, William Fuld and Isaac Fuld, were early 1900s inventors who devised the Ouija board. Sandra has four sisters, one of whom is her twin, the scholar and author, Susan Huganir Magsamen. She received a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from the Swain School of Design in New Bedford, Massachusetts in 1981 and a Master's in Art Therapy from Goucher College in 1984.
Magsamen first became interested in the arts and the interaction of art, creativity, health and well-being in as a child when she was severely injured in a farming accident and spent a year in home and hospital school where she spent her days painting and drawing.
Magsamen is married to painter Mark Barry. Together, they have one daughter, Hannah.


Publishing
Magsamen is a best-selling and award-winning  author of over 60 adult and children's books and has sold over 5 million copies to date. Her children's books consistently rank as best-sellers at Barnes & Noble, Target, Amazon  and Walmart and are additionally sold nationally at wholesale clubs, specialty markets, independent booksellers and online retailers.
Magsamen's work with publishers Scholastic and Sourcebooks have made her well known. Notable titles include: “Welcome Little One”, “You!” and “I Love You Honey Bunny”.


Career
In 1987, Magsamen began creating her own art in her kitchen to commemorate the varied experiences and inspirations embedded in everyday life. She created a collection of pottery for her newborn daughter as a gift of life lessons. This gift became the essence of her life work.
In response to a growing demand for her handmade originals, Magsamen founded Table Tiles, Inc., her handmade gift company in 1991, which, in less than a decade, expanded into a multi-million dollar gift business.
In 1997, she began licensing her work. Since then, she has designed successful collections for national department stores, mid-tier, specialty and mass market through her national lifestyle brands From the Studio of Sandra Magsamen, Messages from the Heart, Wishes & Kisses and Treasured.
In 2003, Magsamen's book “The Gift” (published by Glitterati Books) was selected as the inspiration for Saks 5th Avenue's annual Christmas window display. In partnership with Save The Music. The display shared the story of “The Gift” with the help of A-list musicians like Beyonce, Sheryl Crow, Darius Rucker, B.B. King, Gloria Estefan, Ashanti and Jewel.
Beginning in 2013, Magsamen began a partnership with online retailer 1-800-Flowers to design exclusive collections for their customers. Magsamen has said of the collaboration, "1-800-Flowers wants to help connect people and so do I, so our partnership is one of deep understanding and shared commitment.".
In 2015, Magsamen began a partnership with Studio E Fabrics and, through this partnership, has created over 30 “sew your own” fabric book kits. Also in 2015, Magsamen began working with Bamboozle Homewares to create a line of sustainable dinnerware for children made from 100% recycled bamboo fibers.
In 2017, Magsamen partnered with Chick-fil-a to design a signature collection of children's board books for the Chick-fil-a Kid's Meal program.


In the media
Magsamen has been featured on The Big Idea with Donny Deutsch, In Style Magazine, O Magazine, Women's Wear Daily, In Touch, Us Weekly, The Baltimore Sun  Publishers Weekly, WYPR's Midday with Tom Hall, The Children's Book Review  and Life & Style.
She is a featured columnist on Oprah.com with 200+ articles.
Magsamen's signature lifestyle book, Living Artfully, which was accompanied by the television special, "Living Artfully with Sandra Magsamen," premiered on PBS stations nationwide in December 2006.(PBS) published by Free Press.
In 2007, Magsamen designed the decorations and guest gift baskets for the baby shower of Tori Spelling and Dean McDermott using her “Messages From the Heart” baby collection with JCPenney.
Magsamen appeared on a 2014 episode of the OWN Show (the Oprah Winfrey YouTube Channel) to share creative gifting ideas.


References

The Sanremo Music Festival 1953 (Italian: Festival di Sanremo 1953), officially the 3rd Italian Song Festival (3º Festival della canzone italiana), was the third annual Sanremo Music Festival, held at the Sanremo Casino in Sanremo between 29 and 31 January 1953, and broadcast by Radio Audizioni Italiane (RAI). The show was presented by Nunzio Filogamo.
According to the rules of this edition every song was performed in a double performance by a couple of singers or groups, with some artists performing multiple songs.
The winner of the festival was "Viale d'autunno", performed by Carla Boni and Flo Sandon's.


Participants and results


References

Sara Shapiro Miller (July 8, 1924 – October 29, 2016) was an American real estate executive and sculptor.


Early life
Born Sara Shirlee Shapiro on the west side of Chicago, Miller was the daughter of Philip Shapiro, a baker, and Rose Morris Shapiro, a boarding house proprietor. The tenth of twelve children, she grew up in the Lincoln Park neighborhood. After graduation from Jones Commercial High School she entered the world of real estate, taking a job as a professional realtor with Arthur Rubloff. Beginning in the field of office leasing, she later moved to commercial and industrial real estate, eventually becoming a vice president at Rubloff's firm. 


Personal life
Married in 1946 to Ira J. Miller, she was the mother of three children. Miller and her husband were among the founders of Little City, and did philanthropic work on behalf of the developmentally disabled, raising money to build a home for them in Palatine, Illinois. The couple were members of Anshe Emet Synagogue. Miller began studying ceramics and sculpture in her retirement years, studying at Truman College and at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and working with Anna Varalla and Morino Moretti, the latter in Orvieto. She was a member of Chicago's Palette and Chisel Artist's studio. In later years she lived at the Hancock Tower, where she died.


Sculpting career
Miller produced a number of public sculptures for Chicago institutions during her career. Among these were busts of Saul Bellow, installed in the Harold Washington Library in 1993, and Gwendolyn Brooks, commissioned for the same location the following year. Brooks honored the artist with a poem upon completion of her portrait. The library also owns a 1994 bust of Ernest Hemingway by the artist. Copies of the busts of both Bellow and Brooks are owned by the National Portrait Gallery.


References

Scouts & Assassins is a 1980 role-playing game supplement for Traveller published by Paranoia Press.


Contents
Scouts & Assassins is a book detailing scout and assassin characters for Traveller.


Publication history
Scouts and Assassins was written by Donald P. Rapp and was published in 1980 by Paranoia Press as a digest-sized 12-page book; a second edition was published in the same year with a red cover, as was a 16-page third edition with a white cover, a map, and a 4-page pamphlet.


Reception
William A. Barton reviewed Scouts & Assassins in The Space Gamer No. 32. Barton commented that "Until GDW publishes their own, if you want an 'official' scout system, Scouts & Assassins is it."
William A. Barton reviewed the 2nd edition of Scouts & Assassins in The Space Gamer No. 41. Barton commented that "Scouts & Assassins, 2nd Edition is a very professional work, worthy to stand alongside GDW's own Traveller materials. Even if you own a copy of the first edition, I recommend the new one; you'll find enough new material to make it well worth the price."


References

Scythris canescens is a moth of the family Scythrididae. It was described by Staudinger in 1880. It is found in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Turkey, Syria, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan.


References

Securitas AB is a Swedish group devoted to security services, such as security guarding, mobile patrolling, monitoring, investigation and related consulting services. The group is headquartered in Stockholm and had over 322,000 employees in 44 markets worldwide as of 2025. Securitas AB is listed at Nasdaq OMX Stockholm in the Large Cap segment.
Securitas AB owns and operates the Swiss security company Protectas AG in Switzerland, where there is a pre-existing, separate security company called Securitas AG, part of the Swiss Securitas Group.
Since 1999, Securitas AB has been the parent company of Pinkerton, a historically significant American detective agency.


History
Securitas AB was founded in 1934 in Helsingborg, Sweden, as AB Hälsingborgs Nattvakt, when Erik Philip-Sörensen bought a small guarding company. In 1935, the name was changed to Förenade Svenska Vakt AB. The company expanded through acquisitions of several small security companies, initially in southern Sweden.
In 1949, AB Securitas Alarm was founded as the company's security technology subsidiary, and during the following decade, the company started expanding internationally.
Securitas made its first technical breakthrough in 1961 with the Securi-Coll automatic access control system. The company then introduced a payment system for petrol stations in Sweden, which was later modified to enable cash withdrawals. On May 7, 1968, Securitas launched the world's first ATM linked to a banking system at Oxie Sparbank in Malmö.
In 1972, the group was rebranded as Securitas, the Roman goddess of security and stability, with a logotype consisting of three red dots and the word "Securitas". The dots are described as representing the group's core values of "Integrity, Vigilance, and Helpfulness."
In 1976, Erik Philip-Sörensen sold the Securitas group to his sons Jörgen Philip-Sörensen and Sven Philip-Sörensen, and in 1981, the group was divided between the sons, with the international operations developing into Group 4 and the Swedish operations retaining the Securitas brand.
In 1983, Securitas was sold to the holding company Skrinet, and in 1985, it was acquired by Investment AB Latour, controlled by Gustaf Douglas. Under the new ownership, the group focused on security, and in 1989, an international expansion began with acquisitions in Norway, Denmark, and Portugal and the establishment of Hungary.
In 1991, Securitas was listed on the Stockholm Stock Exchange. In 1994, the group distributed ASSA AB (acquired in 1988) to its shareholders. Throughout the 1990s, foreign acquisitions were made in eleven European countries and in the United States.
In February 1999, Securitas acquired Pinkerton and in August 2000, Burns Security and several regional security companies in the United States. These acquisitions made Securitas one of the largest security companies in the world. In 2001, a new organization took effect, with five business areas according to the types of services offered, and Loomis Fargo & Company was acquired.
In 2003, the group's security services in the United States were integrated under the Securitas brand, and the group's cash handling services were completely divisionalized, with joint management for United States and European operations.
In 2006, the divisions Securitas Systems (alarm, monitoring, and access control systems) and Securitas Direct (solutions for homes and small businesses) were distributed to the group's shareholders and listed at the Stockholm Stock Exchange. In the same year, the divisions Mobile (small and medium-sized customers) and Alert Services (electronic surveillance of homes and businesses) were created (as of 2007, constituting the business segment Mobile and Monitoring). Securitas Direct was later renamed to Verisure in all countries except Spain and Portugal.
In November 2007, the United Kingdom cash handling services of the division Loomis were sold to Vaultex Ltd., owned by HSBC and Barclays. Securitas began operating in Peru in November 2007. In 2008, the division Loomis (cash handling) was distributed to the group's shareholders and listed at Nasdaq OMX Stockholm.
In September 2010, Securitas acquired the security-services operations of Reliance Security Group in the United Kingdom. In November 2011, Securitas acquired Chubb Security Personnel in the United Kingdom.
As of 2012, Securitas was present in 53 countries and territories.
In 2013, Securitas acquired Pinkerton Government Services, which provides cleared security services to governmental agencies and programs that require a Department of Defense or Department of Energy security clearance. This government services division of Securitas became known as Securitas Critical Infrastructure Services. This division operates both in the United States and worldwide when cleared services are needed overseas.
In October 2015, Securitas acquired Diebold Incorporated's (NYSE-DBD) Electronic Security business in North America. Diebold's North American Electronic Security business, based in Green, Ohio, United States, is the third largest commercial electronic security provider in North America. Diebold's North American Electronic Security business has approximately 1,100 employees. The operation includes more than 55,000 monitored customer locations and 200,000 sites serviced.
In March 2022, Securitas partnered with Citizen to trial a version of Citizen's on-demand private security service in Chicago.
On July 22, 2022, Securitas purchased Stanley Security Solutions, which included Stanley Healthcare, from the American company Stanley Black & Decker. The brands were renamed Securitas Technology and Securitas Healthcare, respectively. The initial agreement was signed on December 8, 2021


Controversies


Murder of Cassie Heppner
In February 2020, American Securitas officer Robert Pavao murdered Timberland employee Cassie Heppner at Timberland's corporate headquarters in Stratham, New Hampshire, where Pavao was contracted to. Pavao was found guilty of second degree homicide and sentenced to 55 years in prison for the crime.


Suspension for Harvard union protest
In January 2022, an American Securitas officer contracted to Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Walter J. Terzano, was suspended for protesting during a contentious union contract negotiation between Securitas and the Service Employees International Union. Terzano created protest signs and attempted to get other Securitas officers to protest outside the home of University President Lawrence Bacow. A complaint was made to Securitas by Harvard's director of facilities and maintenance, leading to the suspension. The National Labor Relations Board ruled that Securitas had unlawfully retaliated against Terzano.


Sex scandal
In 2010, the chief executive of Securitas Sweden was arrested for buying sexual services from a prostitute in Stockholm. He was convicted in 2012. The company said it would put an end to the misogynistic and sexist culture that prevailed in the company.
In 2022, A Swedish TV documentary exposed two employees at Securitas Sweden who paid for sex during work trips and were suspected of having bribed employees of the city of Malmö. The company fired them.


Operations

Securitas is organized into three business segments: Securitas North America, Securitas Europe, and Securitas Ibero-America. The Group also has operations in Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Australia, which form the AMEA division.
In general, the group operates under the brand Securitas for all business segments.  Specialized services including due diligence, background checks, security assessments, brand protection, intellectual property protection, executive protection, investigations, cyber surveillance, computer forensics, social compliance and IT security are performed worldwide under the brand "Pinkerton."
These operations are reported as part of the North American business segment. There are three operations centers in North America: Toronto, Ontario, Parsippany, New Jersey and Westlake Village, California. The Swiss market is an exception to the name, in that general security services are provided under the brand Protectas.


On-site guarding
Securitas' primary operations are their on-site security and guarding services. Through their on-site guarding division, Securitas provides on-site security officers in various roles. Most commonly Securitas officers are hired for standing rolls, reception, patrol, and vehicle patrol. Specialty assignments can also include fire-watch, fire extinguisher testing, access control and badging, console operations, safety auditing, alarm & emergency response, and what Securitas refers to as "customized and site-specific security tasks". Additionally, Securitas offers special event security services, primarily for concerts and sporting events.


Mobile patrol
Securitas operates a mobile patrol division, which they refer to as "mobile guarding". Businesses wanting security but not needing full time guards can subscribe to a mobile patrol service where officers will patrol the property one to a few times a night. The subscription also includes incident response services for security concerns occurring when an officer is not currently on-site.


Remote guarding
Remote Guarding services involve Securitas officers monitoring a customer's site from an off-site command center. If suspicious activity is noticed, Securitas can use speakers to talk to people on-site as well as notify the police or other emergency services when necessary. Mobile patrol officers are also often used to respond to incidents discovered by a remote guarding officer. Securitas also offers remote escort services that involve an off-site officer watching an employee walk to or from their vehicle.


Securitas Technology
Securitas Technology, which includes Securitas Healthcare, primarily provides locks, fire sensors, security cameras, and similar hardware. They also provide the software used to monitor this hardware. Additionally, Securitas Technology provides computer security software to protect hardware, software, or electronic data.


Risk Management & Private Investigations

Securitas' corporate risk management and investigations services are provided by their subsidiary Pinkerton.


Gallery


See also

Loomis for robberies committed against Loomis while it was a division of Securitas
Securitas depot robbery for the events of 2006 affecting the United Kingdom cash handling operations of the Loomis division of Securitas, at the time operating under the Securitas brand, and in 2007, sold to HSBC and Barclays
Surfside condominium collapse, a 2021 building collapse for which Securitas paid over $500 million US in a later settlement


References


External links
 Media related to Securitas AB at Wikimedia Commons
Official website of Securitas AB
Official website of Pinkerton
Securitas Epay

Sedgewickville is a village in northern Bollinger County in Southeast Missouri, United States. The population was 191 at the 2020 census.
Sedgewickville is part of the Cape Girardeau–Jackson, MO-IL Metropolitan Statistical Area.


Etymology
Sedgewickville was originally called Smithville; the present name was adopted in 1892.


Geography
According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of 0.64 square miles (1.66 km2), all land.


Demographics


2010 census
As of the census of 2010, there were 173 people, 61 households, and 41 families living in the village. The population density was 270.3 inhabitants per square mile (104.4/km2). There were 68 housing units at an average density of 106.3 per square mile (41.0/km2). The racial makeup of the village was 100.00% White. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.73% of the population.
There were 61 households, of which 47.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.8% were married couples living together, 8.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 8.2% had a male householder with no wife present, and 32.8% were non-families. 19.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.84 and the average family size was 3.34.
The median age in the village was 30.5 years. 28.9% of residents were under the age of 18; 11.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 33.5% were from 25 to 44; 18.6% were from 45 to 64; and 7.5% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the village was 49.7% male and 50.3% female.


2000 census
As of the census of 2000, there were 197 people, 69 households, and 54 families living in the village. The population density was 311.5 inhabitants per square mile (120.3/km2). There were 75 housing units at an average density of 118.6 per square mile (45.8/km2). The racial makeup of the village was 99.49% White, and 0.51% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.02% of the population.
There were 69 households, out of which 44.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.7% were married couples living together, 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.7% were non-families. 17.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.86 and the average family size was 3.26.
In the village, the population was spread out, with 33.5% under the age of 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 34.5% from 25 to 44, 13.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 105.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.7 males.
The median income for a household in the village was $35,156, and the median income for a family was $34,464. Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $14,375 for females. The per capita income for the village was $11,962. About 8.5% of families and 14.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 23.1% of those 65 or over.


References

Selective vehicle detection was the name of a bus priority system used by London Buses to allow traffic signals to selectively favour buses' movement through intersection by changing traffic light sequences and timings as buses approach.
Following a successful large-scale trial in 1987, London Transport began introducing selective vehicle detection to shorten red lights or extend green lights in the 1990s. This delivered journey time savings, as well as increased service reliability and reduced costs, as a smaller number of vehicles were required to deliver the same frequency. For example, it was estimated that route 15 could have a journey time 4 minutes shorter, due to the number of selective vehicle detection points passed. The system worked using 'bus detectors' either mounted on lampposts by the side of the road or ground loops, which detect transmission made by transmitters aboard buses.
Selective vehicle detection was replaced by the iBus system in the late 2000s which tracks all London's buses, allowing passengers to be provided with audio-visual announcements and improved information on bus arrivals, as well as triggering bus priority at traffic lights. iBus uses the Global Positioning System instead of physical roadside equipment. All buses in London were fitted with the iBus system by 2009.


See also
London iBus system
Bus priority and bus lanes in London


References


External links
Bus priority at traffic signals keeps London's buses moving
Siemens Selective Vehicle Detection
Attitudes to bus priority schemes
Review of bus priority at traffic signals around the world
Attitudes to bus priority schemes – Research Summary

Sendra also known as Shendra  is a village in Parbhani taluka of Parbhani district of Maharashtra state in India.


Demography
According to the 2011 census of India, Sendra had a population of 1,526, of which 792 were male and 734 were female. The average sex ratio of the village was 927, which was lower than the Maharashtra state average of 929. The literacy rate was 68.9% compared to 82.3% for the state. Male literacy rate was 79% while female literacy rate was 57%.


References

The Sentencing Act of 1987 (Pub.L. 100-182) enacted some changes to the federal sentencing regime in the United States. The legislation amended 18 U.S.C. § 3553(b) to permit expressly departures based on circumstances of an exceptional "kind" or "degree". The insertion of this new language was described by the manager of the House bill, Representative John Conyers, as "clarifying" in nature because it simply made explicit in the law that which was previously described in the Senate Committee Report as implicit and intended. There is evidence that under the new regime, sentences may not have increased as much as expected: although the average prison term for trial sentences increases post‐reforms, there is no systematic increase in the average length of the pleas.
Additionally, the law abolished parole for federal prisoners and created the United States Sentencing Commission. The commission makes the guidelines used by federal judges when sentencing people convicted of a federal crime.
The bill was introduced by Senator Joseph Biden on October 27, 1987. It was signed into law on December 7, 1987, by President Ronald Reagan.


References

Shestakovo (Russian: Шестаково) is a rural locality (a village) in Kichmegnskoye Rural Settlement, Kichmengsko-Gorodetsky District, Vologda Oblast, Russia. The population was 24 as of 2002.


Geography
Shestakovo is located 31 km northeast of Kichmengsky Gorodok (the district's administrative centre) by road. Kilchenga is the nearest rural locality.


References

Shim So-young (hangul: 심소영) is a South Korean actress. She is known for her roles in dramas such as Alchemy of Souls, Green Mothers' Club, Behind Every Star, Taxi Driver and Pandora: Beneath the Paradise. She also appeared in films including Illang: The Wolf Brigade, The Battle: Roar to Victory, Dark Figure of Crime and The Day I Died: Unclosed Case.


Filmography


Television series


Film


Awards and nominations


References


External links
Shim So-young at HanCinema
Shim So-young at IMDb

Marian Shirley Ballard (September 21, 1925 – October 27, 2012) was an American actress, director and screenwriter who starred in an array of shows and programs.


Biography
Marian Shirley Ballard was born on September 21, 1925 in Los Angeles to George Keneth Ballard and Mildred Randell Ballard. Her father worked as a bookkeeper and her mother was a homemaker.
She won the Miss California beauty pageant in 1944. She was married to Jason Evers from December 1953 to September 1966.
Ballard died on October 27, 2012. She was buried at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Los Angeles.


Selected filmography
Easter Parade as Showgirl (uncredited) (1948)
It's a Great Feeling as Beautiful Girl on Bike (uncredited) (1949)
The Fargo Phantom as Pat Condon (as Shirlee Allard)
Tarzan and the Slave Girl (1950)
The Second Woman as Vivian Sheppard (1950)
The Desert Hawk as Naga (1950)
Frenchie as Dealer (uncredited) (1950)
Scandal Sheet as Telephone Operator (uncredited) (1952)
Cop Hater as Alice Maguire (1958)
Bonanza as Belle Trask (1 episode)
The Twilight Zone (1 episode "Person or Persons Unknown") as Wilma No. 1
The Laughing Policeman as Grace Martin (1973)


References


External links
Shirley Ballard at IMDb

Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubacar (Arabic: سيدي محمد ولد بوبكر; born 31 May 1957) is a Mauritanian politician who has been Prime Minister of Mauritania twice, from 1992 to 1996 and again from 2005 to 2007.


Life and career
Born in Atar in 1957, Sidi Mohamed studies law at the University of Orléans, obtaining a Master of Advanced Studies in political economy in 1981. He is regional treasurer in Nouadhibou in April 1983 and then technical adviser to the Minister of Finance and Trade in November 1983. In March 1984, he became Treasurer-General of Mauritania. 
Subsequently, during the rule of Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya, he became Director of the supervision of publicly owned establishments in 1985, Director of the budget in 1986 and Controller-General of finances in 1987. He became Director of the plan in December 1987, then Director of the treasury and public accounts in April 1988. 
Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubacar became Minister of Finance in October 1990 and was appointed prime minister on 18 April 1992. He held the latter position until he was dismissed by President Maaouya on 2 January 1996. On 6 January 1996, he was elected Secretary-General of the ruling party, the Democratic and Social Republican Party (PRDS). He was appointed Director of the Presidential Cabinet in 2001. And he became Mauritania's Ambassador to France in 2004.    
Following a military coup against Maaouya on 3 August 2005, he returned to his country from France (where he was appointed Ambassador by the Ould Taya's Government in 2004), on 6 August and was appointed prime minister on 7 August by Col. Ely Ould Mohamed Vall, head of the Military Council for Justice and Democracy (CMJD). Sidi Mohamed's appointment came shortly after the resignation of Sghair Ould M'Bareck, Maaouya's last prime minister before he was ousted in a coup. Sidi Mohamed is a member of the Republican Party for Democracy and Renewal, the successor party of the ruling PRDS.  
Like the members of Military Council for Justice and Democracy, Sidi Mohamed was not allowed to run for president in the March 2007 presidential election. Following the election and the confirmation of the results by the Constitutional Council, Sidi Mohamed submitted his resignation to Ely on 31 March; he was asked to remain in office in a caretaker capacity until the swearing in of the new president, Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi, on 19 April, after which Sidi appointed Zeine Ould Zeidane as prime minister on 20 April.
He then serves as ambassador to Spain, then Egypt and later to the United Nations.
He was a presidential candidate in the June 2019 elections. On 22 June 2019, he received 17.87% of the electoral votes behind General Mohamed Ould Ghazouani (52.01%) and activist Biram Dah Abeid (18.58) in the election.    


References

The Signalhorn (2,911 m) is a mountain of the Swiss Pennine Alps, located south of Eischoll in the canton of Valais. It lies between the valleys of Turtmann and Ginals.


References


External links
Signalhorn on Hikr

Silvio Pagano (born 12 September 1985) is an Italian-German footballer who most recently played for Wuppertaler SV.


References


External links
Silvio Pagano at fussballdaten.de (in German)
Silvio Pagano at Soccerway

Siwan Anderson is a Canadian economist and professor at the Vancouver School of Economics at the University of British Columbia (UBC). Her area of focus is on development economics with a micro-level approach focusing on institutions in developing countries, and also gender economics focusing on the role of women in the economy. Siwan Anderson is also an Associate of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, an Associate of the Theoretical Research in Development Economics (ThReD), a Fellow of the Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of Development (BREAD), and a Faculty Associate of the Center for Effective Global Action. Siwan Anderson is the first woman to receive the John Rae Prize from the Canadian Economics Association.


Early life and education
Siwan Anderson first earned a Bachelor of Science in mathematics from the University of British Columbia in 1990, finished her master's degree two year later and completed her doctoral degree in 1999. Anderson studied mathematics during her undergraduate years, but seeking to apply these skills to social issues in a more relevant way, she was drawn to economics. When she entered graduate school, Anderson was interested in the issue of poverty, the reasons behind it and the challenges it creates for people. She eventually decided to become an economic researcher, addressing problems within the social sciences using economic tools and analysis.


Occupation and affiliations
Professor, Vancouver School of Economics, University of British Columbia
Faculty associate, Center for Effective Global Action, Berkeley, California
Fellow, Bureau for Research and Economic Analysis of Development (BREAD)
Associate, Theoretical Research in Development Economics (ThReD)
Co-Editor, Journal of Development Economics
Editorial board, Journal of Globalization and Development
Editorial board, Ideas for India


Previous positions
2008-2016: Associate professor, University of British Columbia
2007-2014: Associate editor, Indian Review of Growth and Development
2004-2012: Affiliate, BREAD
1999-2002: Assistant professor, Tilburg University, The Netherlands
1999: Research fellow, University of Melbourne, Australia
1998: Research fellow, University of Namur, Belgium


Research
Siwan Anderson's economic research mainly focuses on the role of micro-level institutions in developing countries such as India, and the role of gender within social science. Most of Anderson's analyses in developing countries tackle the issues between economic development and the function of institutions and female participation. One of her projects aims the reveal "the solution to the missing women puzzle in India." Anderson explains that she wants to "look beyond the explanation of an elevated rate of female infanticides to see what role widowhood might also play" in the economy. She also works on projects in India that examines the rural political institutions. Anderson and her colleagues Ashok Kotwal and Patrick François "have collected data from interviews with 9,000 households on the subject of the new unique identification system that is being implemented across the country." Indeed, Siwan Anderson's researches reveal that women in development economy play a crucial role in constructing the conformation of institutions within society, and also enhancing female endorsement in economic growth positively.


Selected scholarships


"Property Rights Over Marital Transfers" (2015)
Together with her colleague Chris Bidner, Siwan Anderson examines women's property rights after marriage in developing countries. With a focus on dowry, the study reveals the incentives of allocating property rights between the married couples, as well as the shifting bargaining power within the marriage market. They utilize economic tools and models to clarify and formalize the "dual role" of dowry in the marriage: the dowry represents both a premortem bequest and a market clearing price to compete in the marriage market. The study explains that women's property rights over the dowry depreciate along with the development, and also suggests that since increased direct economic returns for women enhances the welfare of women, it is essential to promote the financial returns to determine women's welfare and legal rights.


"Suicide and Property Rights in India" (2015)
This paper studies the significance of female property rights on male and female suicide rates in India. Siwan Anderson and her co-researcher Garance Genicot utilize state-level variation in legal changes to women's property rights to examine this issue.
Siwan is known for her research in developing countries. She discovered that enhanced property rights for women are correlates with a decrease in the difference of suicide rates between female and male, but an increase in suicides in both genders. The vast majority of people who committed suicide are in a married relationship. The paper also provides suggestive evidence that marital discord can be a potential reason for explaining that improving female property rights raises suicide rates. However, this paper is not suggesting that enhancing women's ownership over their properties is an undesirable channel. 
With theoretical models and empirical analyses, the study shows how establishing the inheritance rights of women can raise conflict within households and has a correlation in the increase of suicide rates of both genders, highlighting the importance of gender equality and providing help for women seeking to leave unhappy marriages.


"The Age Distribution of Missing Women in India" (2012)
In this article, Anderson and her colleague Debraj Ray examine the concept of "Missing Women," which was first proposed by Indian economist Amartya Sen. Some estimates suggest that the number of women who could potentially be alive is over 25 million. In other words, there are more than two million women "missing" in India in a given year. Anderson and Ray analyze the phenomenon by dividing up the age group across the regions in India, and the findings are shocking.
Foremost, the majority of missing women in India die in their adulthood. The research estimates that roughly 12% of missing women die at birth, 25% in childhood, and 43% in adulthood. Additionally, the distribution of missing women by age group varies across different states in India. The southern states have the lowest number of missing women and make up only 10% of the national total. The remaining part of the data distributes throughout the rest of the country. Since the distribution of missing women varies between states and regions, it is difficult to explain such a phenomenon in India theoretically.
Consequently, the research reveals that the severity of the life-threatening dilemma adult women face in India is no less than young girls.


Grants and awards


Notable awards and honours
2007: UBC Killam Research Prize
2010: Weatherall Visiting Fellowship at Queen's University
2018: John Rae Prize from the Canadian Economics Association


Publications


Academic publications
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. "Missing Unmarried Women." Journal of the European Economic Association (forthcoming).
Anderson, Siwan. "Legal Origins and Female HIV." American Economic Review (forthcoming).
Anderson, Siwan, et al. "Distress in Marathaland." Economic and Political Weekly, Volume L1(51), December 2016, p. 14 -16.
Anderson, Siwan, and Chris Bidner. "Property Rights over Marital Transfers." Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume 130(3), August 2015, p. 1421-1484.
Anderson, Siwan, et al. "One Kind of Democracy: Implementing MGNREGS." Economic and Political Weekly, Volume L, No. 26-27, 27 June 2015, p. 44-48.
Anderson, Siwan, et al. "Clientelism in Indian Villages." American Economic Review, Volume 105(6), June 2015, p. 1780-1816.
Anderson, Siwan, and Garance Genicot. "Suicide and Property Rights in India." Journal of Development Economics, Volume 114, May 2015, p. 64-78.
Anderson, Siwan. "Human capital effects of marriage payments." IZA World of Labor, September 2014, p. 77.
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. "The Age Distribution of Missing Women in India." Economic and Political Weekly, Vol. XLVII, No. 47-48, December 2012, p. 87-95.
Anderson, Siwan. "Caste as an Impediment to Trade." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 3, January 2011, p. 239-263.
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. "Missing Women: Age and Disease." Review of Economic Studies, Volume 77, October 2010, p. 1262-1300.
Anderson, Siwan, and Mukesh Eswaran. "Determinants of female autonomy: evidence from Bangladesh." Journal of Development Economics, 90(2), November 2009, p. 179-191.
Anderson, Siwan, et al. "Enforcement and organizational design in informal savings groups." Journal of Development Economics, September 2009, 90(1), p. 14-23.
Anderson, Siwan, and Patrick Francois. "Formalizing Informal Institutions: Theory and Evidence from a Kenyan Slum." Institutions and Economic Growth, edited by Elhanan Helpman, Harvard University Press, 2008, p. 409-451.
Anderson, Siwan. "The economics of dowry and brideprice Archived 2014-11-13 at the Wayback Machine." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(4), Fall 2007, p. 151-174.
Anderson, Siwan. "Why the marriage squeeze cannot cause dowry inflation", Journal of Economic Theory,137(1), Fall 2007, p. 140-152.
Anderson, Siwan. "The Economics of Roscas and Intra-household Resource Allocation", Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2002 Vol.117


Other works
Anderson, Siwan, and Patrick Francois. "Electoral Reservations and Leadership Quality in Village India." VoxDev, 23 October 2017.
Anderson, Siwan, and Patrick Francois. "Political Reservations and the Quality of Governance." Ideas for India, 23 October 2017.
Anderson, Siwan. "Dowries and Other Marital Transfers." International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. 2nd ed., 2015, Elsevier, p. 641-644.
Anderson, Siwan, and Garance Genicot. "Property Rights, Household Conflict and Suicide in India." Ideas for India, 9 July 2015. Reprinted in Live Mint.
Anderson, Siwan. "Developmental Economist Siwan Anderson provides a view about violence against women in India." CIFAR Exchange, 19 February 2013.
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. "India's Missing Women by Age and State." Ideas for India, 11 January 2013.
Anderson, Siwan. "Caste Dominance in Rural India: Cause and Effect." Ideas for India, 16 August 2012.
Anderson, Siwan. "Roscas." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, William Darity Jr. ed., Macmillan Press. 2008.


Media
Live radio interviews with Siwan Anderson:

Link Asia (San Francisco, 2013)
CBC Morning Show (Vancouver, 2009)
CBC Sunday Edition with Michael Enright (Toronto, 2009)
New Classical 96.3 FM (Toronto, 2009)
The New AM 740 (Toronto, 2009)


References


External links
Siwan Anderson's Homepage
UBC Newsletter: Anderson receives the John Rae Prize
UBC One Great Idea Series by Anderson
Link Asia: What Happened to India's Two Million Missing Women?
Empowerment with the Household

"Smoke & Mirrors" is the fourth episode of the second season of the American television series Agent Carter, inspired by the films Captain America: The First Avenger and Captain America: The Winter Soldier, and the Marvel One-Shot short film also titled Agent Carter. It features the Marvel Comics character Peggy Carter, and juxtaposes her history with that of Whitney Frost. The episode is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), sharing continuity with the films of the franchise. The episode was written by Sue Chung and directed by David Platt.
Hayley Atwell reprises her role as Carter from the film series, and is joined by regular cast members James D'Arcy, Chad Michael Murray, and Enver Gjokaj.
"Smoke & Mirrors" originally aired on ABC on February 2, 2016, and according to Nielsen Media Research, was watched by 2.77 million viewers.


Plot

In the 1920s, in Broxton, Oklahoma, Agnes Cully (who would later become Whitney Frost) is shown to have a brilliant mind, fixing a broken radio, inventing devices, and applying to a science program at the University of Oklahoma, but is rejected due to her gender. Cully's mother doesn't care for her brilliance and tells her looks are all that matter. In 1934, Cully travels to Hollywood, where she is approached by a talent agent, promising to make her a star. In 1940 in England, Peggy Carter, who is engaged, receives an offer to join the Special Operations Executive due to her work at Bletchley Park as a code breaker; she eventually accepts the offer and leaves her fiancé after her brother Michael's death in the war. In 1947, Carter and Edwin Jarvis kidnap Rufus Hunt in an attempt to learn more about the Council of Nine. After getting names of members of the council and locations of transcripts of their meetings, Carter and Daniel Sousa prepare the Strategic Scientific Reserve (SSR) to infiltrate the Arena Club, but are stopped by Vernon Masters. They let a bugged Hunt escape, and he attempts to blackmail Calvin Chadwick in exchange for protection. Displeased with the mess he was causing, Frost absorbs Hunt, revealing her abilities to Chadwick.


Production


Development
In January 2016, Marvel announced that the fourth episode of the season would be titled "Smoke & Mirrors", to be written by Sue Chung, with David Platt directing.


Casting

In January 2016, Marvel revealed that main cast members Hayley Atwell, James D'Arcy, Enver Gjokaj, Wynn Everett, Reggie Austin, and Chad Michael Murray would star as Peggy Carter, Edwin Jarvis, Daniel Sousa, Whitney Frost, Jason Wilkes, and Jack Thompson, respectively. It was also revealed that the guest cast for the episode would include Currie Graham as Calvin Chadwick, Kurtwood Smith as Vernon Masters, Chris Browning as Rufus Hunt, Carole Ruggier as Amanda Carter, Gabriella Graves as young Peggy Carter, Webb Baker Hayes as young Michael Carter, Ivy George as young Agnes Cully, Olivia Welch as teen Agnes Cully, Samaire Armstrong as Wilma Cully, Chris Mulkey as Uncle Bud Schultz, Max Brown as Michael Carter, Christopher Grove as Mr. Edwards, Catriona Toop as Bletchley girl #1, Jennifer Neala Page as Bletchley girl #2, Kevin Changaris as Fred Wells, Jonathan Lavallee as FBI Agent, Andrew Carter as Ned Silver, Khalilah Joi as ticket lady and Tamika Katon-Donegal as Mabel. Ruggier, Graves, Hayes, George, Welch, Toop, Page, Lavallee, Carter, Joi, and Katon-Donegal did not receive guest star credit in the episode, while Everett and Austin received guest star credit instead of regular starring. Graham, Smith, and Browning reprise their roles from earlier in the series.


Release
"Smoke & Mirrors" was first aired in the United States on ABC on February 2, 2016. The episode debuted on Hulu on November 29, 2017, after it acquired the exclusive streaming rights to the series, and was made available on Disney+ at launch, on November 12, 2019, along with the rest of the series.


Reception


Ratings
In the United States the episode received a 0.8/2 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49, meaning that it was seen by 0.8 percent of all households, and 2 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast. It was watched by 2.77 million viewers.


References


External links
"Smoke & Mirrors" at ABC
"Smoke & Mirrors" at IMDb

The Socialist Party of the People of Ceuta (Spanish: Partido Socialista del Pueblo de Ceuta, abbreviated to PSPC) is a political party in Ceuta, an autonomous city of Spain in north Africa. The PSPC was founded in 1985; amongst its members were defectors from Spanish Socialist Workers' Party and the Communist Party.
A major demand of the PSPC is that Ceuta be made into an Autonomous Community, like other regions of Spain.
The youth wing of the PSPC is called Alternativa 21.
In 2009, the PSPC merged with the Ceutan Democratic Union (UDCE) to form the Caballas Coalition.


External links
PSPC website
PSPC election video at YouTube

Sports TV Uganda Limited was incorporated in October 2007, and has been licensed by the Uganda Broadcasting Council  on February 29, 2008. Sports TV has commenced test broadcast on July 14, 2008.
The station is broadcasting sports from around the world, and 24/7, free-to-air. It is privately owned by Bent and Nada Andersen. Sports TV is broadcasting sports programmes compiled by Setanta Africa network, a free-to-air broadcasters' network that is spreading across Africa, with broadcasters in over 20 African countries.


Information
Sports TV is the first sports-only television channel in Uganda. As the last entrant on the Ugandan TV scene, the channel is already very popular and covers the central regions of Uganda, stretching as far as Busia town on Uganda-Kenya border in the north-east, and beyond Kalangala Islands and Masaka town in the south-east parts of the country.
Sports TV has acquired all its broadcasting equipment from ABE Electronica in Italy, including a solid state digital-ready 3KWA transmitter. Sports TV is, as other media houses in Uganda, licensed by Uganda Broadcasting Council, Uganda Communication Commission  and Uganda Media Council.
Sports TV entered a frequency and revenue sharing contract with the Vision Group, and was broadcasting as Urban TV and thereafter as Bukedde 2. Due to the breach of contract, Sports TV and Vision Group ended in a protracted legal battle from 2013 until end of 2018, when the Commercial Court of the Republic of Uganda ruled in favour of Sports TV. However, the broadcasting equipment remained at the premises of Vision Group and by the time the court case was under way, Sports TV was unable to retrieve it and continue broadcasting on its own, thus losing its broadcasting license in the process.
Sports TV now operates as a content provider and plans to remain involved in sports production and broadcasting through placement on local TV channels. 


References

Star Trek Generations is a 1994 American science fiction film and the seventh installment in the Star Trek film series. Malcolm McDowell joins cast members from the 1966 television show Star Trek and the 1987 sequel series The Next Generation, including William Shatner and Patrick Stewart. In the film, Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise-D joins forces with Captain James T. Kirk to stop the villain Dr Tolian Soran from destroying a planetary system in his attempt to return to an extra-dimensional realm known as the Nexus.
Generations was conceived as a transition from the original cast of the Star Trek films to the cast of The Next Generation. After developing several film ideas concurrently, the producers chose a script written by Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga. Production began while the final season of the television series was being made. The director was David Carson, who previously directed episodes of the television series; photography was by franchise newcomer John A. Alonzo. Filming took place on the Paramount Studios lots, and on location in Valley of Fire State Park, Nevada, and Lone Pine, California. The film's climax was revised and reshot following poor reception from test audiences. The film uses a mix of traditional optical effects alongside computer-generated imagery and was scored by regular Star Trek composer Dennis McCarthy.
Star Trek Generations was released in the United States on November 18, 1994. Paramount promoted the film with merchandising tie-ins, including toys, books, games, and a website—a first for a major motion picture. The film opened at the top of the United States box office its first week of release and grossed a total of $118 million worldwide. Critical reception was mixed, with critics divided on the film's characters and comprehensibility to a casual viewer. It was followed by Star Trek: First Contact in 1996.


Plot
In 2293, retired Starfleet officers James T. Kirk, Montgomery Scott, and Pavel Chekov attend the maiden voyage of the USS Enterprise-B. During the shakedown cruise, the starship is pressed into a rescue mission to save two El-Aurian refugee ships that a massive energy ribbon has snared. Enterprise saves some of the refugees before their ships are destroyed, but becomes trapped by the ribbon, and Kirk goes to a control room to help the ship escape. While Enterprise is freed, Kirk is presumed lost in space and dead after the trailing end of the ribbon tears open the ship's hull.
In 2371, the crew of the USS Enterprise-D is in a holodeck computer simulation, celebrating the promotion of shipmate Worf to lieutenant commander. Captain Jean-Luc Picard learns his brother and nephew have been killed in a fire, and is distraught that the Picard family line will end with him. Enterprise receives a distress call from a stellar observatory, where an El-Aurian, Dr. Tolian Soran, launches a probe at the nearby star. The probe causes the star to implode, creating a shockwave that destroys its planetary system. Soran kidnaps Enterprise engineer Geordi La Forge and is transported off the station by a Klingon Bird of Prey belonging to the Duras sisters.
Enterprise crewmember Guinan tells Picard that she and Soran were among the El-Aurians rescued in 2293. Soran—who lost his family when their homeworld was destroyed—is obsessed with returning to the energy ribbon to reach the "Nexus", an extra-dimensional realm of wish fulfillment outside normal space-time. Picard and Data determine that Soran, unable to safely fly a ship directly into the ribbon, is altering its path by removing the gravitational effects of nearby stars. Soran plans to destroy another star to bring the ribbon to the planet Veridian III, consequently killing millions on a nearby inhabited planet.
Upon entering the Veridian system, Picard offers himself to the Duras sisters in exchange for La Forge but insists on being transported to Soran directly. La Forge is returned to Enterprise, but unwittingly exposes the ship's defense details through the transmitter installed in his VISOR device. The Duras sisters attack, and Enterprise sustains critical damage before destroying the Bird of Prey by triggering its cloaking device, and firing photon torpedoes when its shields drop. When La Forge reports that the starship is about to suffer a warp-core breach as a result of the attack, Commander William Riker evacuates everyone to the forward saucer section of the starship, which separates from the engineering section just before the breach occurs. The resulting shockwave sends the saucer-section crashing onto the surface of Veridian III.
Picard fails to stop Soran from launching another probe. The Veridian star's resulting destruction alters the ribbon's course, and Picard and Soran enter the Nexus before the shockwave destroys Veridian III. Picard is surrounded by an idealized family, but realizes it is an illusion. He is met by an "echo" of Guinan left behind in the Nexus. Guinan sends him to meet James T. Kirk, who is safe in the Nexus. Though Kirk is initially entranced by the opportunity the Nexus offers to atone for past regrets, he realizes it lacks danger and excitement. Having learned that they can travel whenever and wherever desired through the Nexus, Picard convinces Kirk to return with him to Veridian III, shortly before Soran launches the probe.
Working together, Kirk and Picard distract Soran long enough for Picard to lock the probe in place; it explodes on the launchpad and kills Soran. Kirk is fatally injured in the effort, and Picard buries him at the site. Three Federation starships arrive to retrieve the Enterprise survivors from Veridian III. Picard muses that, given the ship's legacy, the Enterprise-D will not be the last vessel to carry the name.


Cast

The main cast of Star Trek: The Next Generation reprise their roles in Generations: Patrick Stewart as Captain Jean-Luc Picard, Jonathan Frakes as Commander William Riker, LeVar Burton as Chief Engineer Lieutenant Commander Geordi La Forge, Brent Spiner as Lieutenant Commander Data, Gates McFadden as Chief Medical Officer Commander Beverly Crusher, Michael Dorn as Lieutenant Commander Worf, and Marina Sirtis as ship's counselor Commander Deanna Troi. Recurring characters from the series return, including Barbara March and Gwynyth Walsh as the villainous Klingon sisters Lursa and B'Etor Duras, Patti Yasutake as Enterprise nurse Lieutenant Alyssa Ogawa, and Whoopi Goldberg as Guinan.
Malcolm McDowell plays Tolian Soran, the film's antagonist. Marlon Brando wanted to play the role and informed producer Rick Berman about it, but Shelley Lanberg turned him down due to his high price demands. McDowell had worked with Stewart on stage decades earlier, and relished the chance to kill Shatner's character. He liked his character's spiked hair and black ensemble, and requested that his character not have alien features to avoid lengthy makeup sessions.
In the film's initial script, the entire principal cast of The Original Series was featured, but only three members appear in the film: William Shatner as Kirk, James Doohan as Scott, and Walter Koenig as Chekov. Leonard Nimoy and DeForest Kelley declined to appear as their characters Spock and Leonard McCoy. Nimoy felt there were story problems with the script and that Spock's role was extraneous. Producer Rick Berman told the press, "Both Leonard Nimoy and DeForest Kelley felt they made a proper goodbye in the last movie." Nimoy and Kelley's lines were subsequently modified for Doohan and Koenig. The news that not all of the Original Series cast was in the film was not passed to all of The Next Generation actors. When Goldberg arrived on set on her first day, she immediately asked to see Nichelle Nichols, who portrayed Nyota Uhura in The Original Series. When told that Nichols was not in the film, she said to Koenig, "The fans have been waiting for years to see Nichelle and me and Uhura and Guinan on screen together." Patrick Stewart said that he had made an effort to ensure the original cast's involvement in the film: "I didn't want us to sail into the future just as The Next Generation cast."

Alan Ruck plays Enterprise-B captain John Harriman. When approached for the role, Ruck assumed he would play an alien, saying, "Look, when I shave every day, I don't look in the mirror and say, 'Hey! There's a starship commander.'" Berman informed him that the character was from a wealthy and connected family, and was placed in command as a stepping stone to a political career. Jacqueline Kim plays Enterprise-B helmsman Demora Sulu. Kim consulted with art supervisor Michael Okuda to make sure her hand movements and manipulations of the ships' controls were consistent and accurate. Glenn Morshower played an Enterprise-B navigator; he apologized to the director for a poor first rehearsal, because as a Star Trek fan he was unused to performing along with actors he had idolized for years.
Many of the minor characters throughout the film appeared in different roles in the television series. Tim Russ, who appears as an Enterprise-B bridge officer, played a terrorist in "Starship Mine" and a Klingon in "Invasive Procedures", and later joined the cast of Star Trek: Voyager as the Vulcan Tuvok. Various background roles were played by the main cast's stunt doubles.


Production


Development
In 1992, months before the official announcement of a followup to Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country, Paramount Pictures executives approached Star Trek: The Next Generation producer Rick Berman about creating another feature film. Berman informed writers Ronald D. Moore and Brannon Braga that Paramount had approved a two-picture deal approximately midway through The Next Generation's sixth season. Moore and Braga, convinced Berman had called them into his office to tell them The Next Generation was cancelled and they were out of a job, were instead given the task of writing the film. Berman also worked with former Next Generation producer Maurice Hurley to develop possible story ideas, intending to develop two film scripts simultaneously and prioritize whichever was most promising. Executive producer Michael Piller turned down the opportunity to develop ideas, objecting to what he saw as a competition for the job. Moore and Braga's script was ultimately chosen. The writers spent weeks developing the story with Berman, before taking a working vacation in May 1993 to write the first-draft screenplay, completed June 1.
Moore described Generations as a project with several required elements. Berman felt that having the original cast of the previous Star Trek films felt like a "good way to pass the baton" to the next series. The studio wanted the original cast to only appear in the first minutes and Kirk only recurring at the end of the film. Other requests included a Khan Noonien Singh–like antagonist, Klingons, and a humorous Data plot. At one point, the writers toyed with the idea of pitting the two crews against each other. "We were obsessed with the poster image of the two Enterprises locked in combat: Kirk vs. Picard, One Must Die!" said Moore. Ultimately, the writers could not come up with a plausible explanation for such a conflict, and abandoned the idea.
In the initial draft of the screenplay, the original series cast appeared in a prologue, and Guinan served as the bridge between the two generations. The opening shot would have been the entire cast crammed into an elevator, happy to be back together. The Enterprise-D's destruction also appeared—the saucer crash had first been proposed by Moore as the conclusion to part one of a sixth-season cliffhanger story that was scrapped. Kirk's death was developed in Braga, Moore, and Berman's story sessions. Moore recalled that "we wanted to aim high, do something different and big... We knew we had to have a strong Picard story arc, so what are the profound things in a man's life he has to face? Mortality tops the list." After the idea of killing off a Next Generation cast member was vetoed, someone suggested that Kirk die instead. "We all sorta looked around and said, 'That might be it,' " Moore said. The studio and William Shatner had few concerns about the plot point.
Refining the script meant facing the realities of budget constraints. The initial proposal included location shooting in Hawaii, Idaho, and the Midwestern United States, and the total budget was over $30 million. The budget dropped to $25 million after negotiations. A revised version of the script from March 1994 incorporated feedback from the producers, studio, actors, and director. The writers changed one sequence where Harriman trained his predecessors in the Enterprise-B's operation after Shatner felt the scene's joke went too far. Picard's personal tragedy was written as his brother Robert's heart attack, but Stewart suggested the loss of his entire family to add emotional impact. The opening sequence took place on the solar observatory with two Rosencrantz and Guildenstern–influenced characters talking shortly before an enemy attack; Next Generation writer Jeri Taylor suggested that the opening should be something "fun", leading to the switch to the holodeck scene.
Leonard Nimoy turned down the chance to direct the feature. The producers chose David Carson. The British director had no feature film experience, but had directed several episodes of Star Trek, including the  Next Generation episode "Yesterday's Enterprise" and the Deep Space Nine pilot "Emissary".


Design
Star Trek veteran Herman Zimmerman served as production designer, collaborating with illustrator John Eaves for many designs. Zimmerman's approach to realizing a vision of the future was to take existing designs and use them in a different manner to express living in the future. Taking cues from director Nicholas Meyer's approach to Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, Zimmerman noted that future humanity will still have the same furniture needs, so a logical approach was to start with what would remain the same and work from there.
Transitioning from television to film meant that sets and designs needed to be more detailed, with a higher level of polish to stand up on the big screen. Zimmerman felt obliged to improve the sets fans had watched for seven seasons, especially the bridge. Zimmerman repainted the set, added computer consoles, raised the captain's chair for a more commanding presence, and reworked the bridge's ceiling struts; he had always been unhappy with how the ceiling looked, but never had the time or money to rework it.
The script called for an entirely new location on the Enterprise-D: stellar cartography. The script described the location as a small room with maps on one wall. Finding the concept uninteresting, Zimmerman designed a three-story circular set to give the impression the actors were inside a star map dominated by screens. Zimmerman's previous work designing a crisis management center influenced the design. The backlit starmaps that covered three-quarters of the wall would have been infeasible to create in the years before the rise of large-format inkjet printers and computer graphics software. The starmaps were replaced with a bluescreen for scenes where the static images would be replaced by computer-animated star maps by Santa Barbara Studios. Stellar cartography was one of the largest sets ever constructed on a Paramount lot.
The film marked the first appearance of the starship Enterprise-B. The ship was a modification of the Excelsior, a model designed and built by Bill George and effects house Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) for Star Trek III: The Search for Spock a decade earlier. Co-producer Peter Lauritson, illustrator John Eaves, and Zimmerman designed the Enterprise-B with additions to its hull, some of which were added so that they could depict damage to the ship without harming the underlying model's surface, and to improve the look of the ship when it was filmed from angles called for in the script. The ship's bridge was based on previous designs for the Enterprise-A and Excelsior sets Zimmerman had created for The Undiscovered Country, using pieces from each. The surrounding spacedock for Enterprise's maiden voyage was a modification of the model created for Star Trek: The Motion Picture (1979), refurbished and modified to better fit the film's anamorphic screen frame.
Like Zimmerman, George took the opportunity of the Enterprise-D's screen debut to touch up the model. Because Generations featured the Enterprise-D separating into its saucer and engineering sections, the original 6-foot (1.8 m) model built by ILM for the television series was removed from storage. The model was stripped, rewired, and its surface detailed to stand up to scrutiny. George changed the paint job, as he recalled they had been in a rush to prepare the model for television and its green-and-blue color scheme did not properly read on film. The paint scheme was shifted towards a "battleship grey", with glossy tiled areas reminiscent of the original feature film Enterprise.
While Generations made use of new sets and props, set decorator John M. Dwyer reused existing props or made new ones out of premade materials where possible, rather than spend money on new items: a torture device was created from a birthing chair, nose hair clippers, and flashlights; packing materials formed the shapes of set walls for the Bird of Prey bridge; and Soran's missile used a bird feeder and other garden store supplies for its interior elements. The stellar observatory set was filled with props from The Next Generation, with some added in deliberate nods to past episodes. Other reused sets included the Klingon bridge built for Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home and ribbed plastic walls in the Jefferies tubes, repurposed from the sets of The Hunt for Red October. Original set pieces and props included paintings for the settings in the Nexus.
Robert Blackman, The Next Generation's long-serving costume designer re-designed the Starfleet uniforms which the Enterprise-D crew would wear in the film. Blackman crafted militaristic-looking uniforms with rank sleeves inspired by The Original Series, high collars, and jackets reminiscent of the uniforms developed for The Wrath of Khan. The redesign was abandoned, and the cast wore combinations of the uniforms from  The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine; the only new addition was an Eaves-designed angular communications badge that replaced the previous oval shape. Time was so short that Jonathan Frakes and Levar Burton borrowed the costumes from Deep Space Nine actors Avery Brooks and Colm Meaney. Also created by Blackman was a skydiving outfit worn by Shatner; though the scene was cut from the film, the costume was used in the Voyager episode "Extreme Risk".


Filming

Berman backed Carson's choice to hire John A. Alonzo, the director of photography for Chinatown and Scarface. Alonzo was shown more than a dozen Star Trek episodes to familiarize himself with the franchise. He favored lighting scenes as much as possible from within the sets rather than staging lights and flags for each shot. Carson credited this approach with saving time and allowing more freedom when shooting. He later wrote that the production moved at a "TV-like" pace; principal photography concluded after 51 days.
Filming commenced on March 28, 1994. Generations and The Next Generation were filmed simultaneously on different soundstages on the Paramount Studios lot. Scenes that did not feature the television series regulars were filmed first, starting with those in the Enterprise-B deflector room. The scenes of Harriman, Chekov, and Scott reacting to Kirk's apparent death were filmed a week later, to allow time for the deflector room to be suitably distressed to visualize the damage.
Stage 7 was where the Enterprise-B's bridge, deflector room, and corridors were built and filmed. The jolts and shocks of the ship in the hold of the energy ribbon were created by camera bumps and motors to shake the set. Filming of the scenes took place in April 1994, while residents were still skittish from the recent 1994 Northridge earthquake; the effects staff deliberately hid the set shakers until cameras were rolling to elicit more genuine reactions. The stellar observatory set was an elaborate redress of the Enterprise-B's bridge, with added levels and swapped walls changing the layout. Control panels styled after those in the original Star Trek series helped suggest the age of the station.
The cast of The Next Generation started filming their scenes for Generations four days after wrapping on the show. After the filming of the series was complete, there were only six months remaining before the film's release date. The Enterprise-D crash scenes were filmed mid-May 1994, and were among the last remaining shots before the existing Next Generation sets were demolished to make way for Star Trek: Voyager. As a result, the crew distressed the sets for the crash damage more than would have been normal during the series' run.

Despite the budget cuts, Generations shot many scenes on location. The rushed pace of filming meant that not all locations had been selected before the start of principal photography, and the production was still scouting locations until two weeks before the final scenes. The production exhausted possible options within Los Angeles' studio zone and looked up to 150 miles (240 km) away for suitable locations. The Enterprise-D promotion ceremony on the holodeck was filmed on Lady Washington, a full-scale replica of the first American sailing ship to visit Japan. Carson fought hard to keep the shoot during budget trims, deciding to sacrifice other days in the schedule to keep the scene. Lady Washington was anchored at Marina del Rey and sailed out a few miles from shore over five days of shooting. Some of Lady Washington's crew appeared amongst Enterprise crew members.
Picard's house in the Nexus was a private home in Pasadena, California; almost all the furnishings were custom props or outside items. Portions of the scene were shot in May 1994, followed by new shoots five months later. The revisions included adding Picard's nephew René to his imagined Christmas celebration with his family. The house of Kirk's Nexus recollections was located in Lone Pine, California, with the cabin filled with props to represent Kirk's career, from a Klingon bat'leth to a painting of his Enterprise.
Carson wanted a suitably remote and alien mountain location for the film's climax at Soran's compound. The scenes were filmed over eight days on an elevated plateau in the "Valley of Fire", north-east of Las Vegas, Nevada. The rise's height and sloped sides required cast and crew to climb 160 feet (49 m) using safety ropes and carry all provisions and equipment with them. The 110 °F (43 °C) heat was difficult for all involved, especially Shatner, who wore a wool costume. Safety harnesses and wires used to keep performers safe from tumbling off a precipice were removed digitally in postproduction.
As originally filmed, Kirk was shot in the back and killed by Soran. Test audiences reacted negatively to the death, so the scene was rewritten and reshot over two weeks so that Kirk sacrifices himself by leaping across a broken walkway to retrieve Soran's control pad and de-cloak the probe. Paramount allowed the film to go over budget to $35 million for the re-shoots. As the production crew had already spent weeks removing traces of their shoot from the Valley of Fire, the set had to be rebuilt under a very tight schedule, followed by effects work to remove wires and rigging in time for the footage to be included in the final cut.


Effects
Generations' special effects tasks were split between the television series' effects vendors and ILM. ILM CG Supervisor John Schlag recalled that it was easy to recruit staff who wanted to work on Star Trek; working on the film "gave me a chance to be a part of the whole Trek thing ... ILM is practically an entire company filled with Trek geeks". The screenwriters filled the initial drafts with exciting—and expensive—effects. Effects supervisor John Knoll's team then storyboarded the effects sequences, figuring out how to best service the script as cheaply as possible. When even those estimates proved too costly, ILM continued cutting shots. "[We had] nothing left to cut, and we still had to cut stuff out," Knoll recalled.
Previous Star Trek films had used conventional motion control techniques to record multiple passes of the starship models and miniatures. For Generations, the effects artists began using computer-generated imagery (CGI) and models for certain shots. No physical shooting models were built for the refugee ships, although George recalled that he created a quick physical miniature for CG modeler Rob Coleman to develop his ideas from, rather than try to articulate his feedback without it. Other CG elements included the solar collapses and the Veridian III planet. Knoll used a digital version of the Enterprise-D for the warp effect; the limitations of the motion-control programming and slitscan effect for the original meant that the effect "barely holds up", Knoll said, whereas the CG recreation could keep consistent lighting throughout. While digital techniques were used for many sequences and ships, a few new models were physically built; these included the observatory, built by model shop foreman John Goodson.
The climactic battle between the Enterprise and the Klingons over Veridian III was accomplished using traditional motion control, but without the budget for practical explosions and special breakaway models, impacts and battle damage were simulated with practical compositing tricks and computer-generated effects. The destruction of the Bird of Prey was a reuse of footage from The Undiscovered Country. Weapons fire and energy bolts were hand-animated, but Knoll had a different idea for the photon torpedoes. A fan of the impressive, arcing look of the torpedoes from The Motion Picture, Knoll scanned in footage from the film and turned to computer-generated effects. A simulator program created a similar look that could be animated from any point the effects artists wanted, without the expense and tedium required—shining lasers through a crystal in a smoky environment—to recreate the look optically.

Carson described the Nexus energy ribbon as the true villain of the film; ILM was responsible for conceiving what the ribbon would look like with no natural frame of reference. "When creating something from scratch, it's always important to rough out the whole thing... because there are so many paths you can explore, it's easy to get bogged down," recalled effects co-supervisor Alex Seiden, who had worked as a technical director on the planetary explosion of Praxis from The Undiscovered Country. Knoll decided the ribbon was a rip through universes, filled with chaotic energy, taking inspiration from images he had seen of magnetic fields around Uranus from a Jet Propulsion Laboratory simulation. The airfoil-shaped core of the undulating ribbon was enhanced with electric tendrils. To sell the ribbon's vastness in space shots where no sense of scale would be available, Seiden and George created a debris field of embers that trailed the ribbon. The inside of the ribbon was conceptualized as similar to a dense electrical storm, with electricity fogging the screen. Because of the complex interplay of the ribbon elements with the ships that would be trapped within it, ILM decided the refugee ships and Enterprise-B should be CG models. To make the switch between computer-generated and motion-control passes of the physical model appear seamless, ILM created a wireframe of the physical model, with the computer-generated model's textures taken from photos of the physical model, shot in flat light with a long lens. The tendril strike that sends Kirk into the Nexus was simulated with the layering of multiple pieces of animation, including CG explosions Knoll rendered on his personal computer and a recycled explosion effect from The Empire Strikes Back.
The Enterprise-D crash sequence was filmed in a 40-by-80-foot (12 by 24 m) forest floor set extended by matte paintings, built outside so ILM could use natural light. A 12-foot (3.7 m) model Enterprise saucer was constructed specifically for the shots; the model's size gave it the right sense of scale for flying dirt and debris, an illusion enhanced by shooting with a high-speed camera to give the saucer the expected slow movement of a massive object. ILM shot its crew members walking about their parking lot and matted the footage onto the top of the saucer to represent Starfleet personnel evacuating the saucer section.


Music

Dennis McCarthy, the principal composer for The Next Generation, was given the task of writing Generations' score. McCarthy became the first Star Trek composer to work on both television and film projects. Critic Jeff Bond wrote that while McCarthy's score was "tasked with straddling the styles of both series", it offered the opportunity for the composer to produce stronger dramatic writing. The film's opening music is a choral piece that plays while a floating champagne bottle tumbles through space. For the action scenes with the Enterprise-B, McCarthy used low brass chords. Kirk was given a brass motif accented by snare drums (a sound not used on The Next Generation), while the scene ends with dissonant notes as Scott and Chekov discover Kirk has been blown into space.
McCarthy expanded his brassy style for the film's action sequences, such as the battle over Veridian III and the crash-landing of the Enterprise-D. For Picard's trip to the Nexus, more choral music and synthesizers accompany Picard's discovery of his family. A broad fanfare—the film's only distinct theme—first plays when Picard and Kirk meet. This theme blends McCarthy's theme for Picard from The Next Generation's first season, notes from the theme for Deep Space Nine, and Alexander Courage's Star Trek theme. For the final battle of Kirk and Picard against Soran, McCarthy used staccato music to accentuate the fistfight. For Kirk's death, McCarthy mated lyrical strings with another statement of the Courage theme, while a shot of Picard standing over Kirk's grave is scored with more pomp. The Courage theme plays again at the film's close.
The original soundtrack was released in 1994 on cassette tape and CD. In 2013, GNP Crescendo Records rereleased the soundtrack as a two-disc, expanded collector's edition including previously unheard tracks.


Release


Marketing
The marketing of Generations included a website, the first to officially publicize a motion picture. The site was a success, being viewed millions of times worldwide in the weeks leading to the film's release, at a time when fewer than a million Americans had internet access. Paramount also promoted the film on the Prodigy online service.
Tie-in merchandise released to promote the film included collectible cups and calendars from Jack in the Box, promotional kiosks at Kmart stores, and action figures. Due to production timelines, these figures wore the Blackman-designed Starfleet uniforms that were ultimately unused in the film itself. Other collectibles included a 600,000-run special issue of Entertainment Weekly dedicated to the film, and stamps and souvenir sheets produced by Guyana. A novelization of the film written by J. M. Dillard spent three weeks on The New York Times Best Seller list. Paramount's licensing group estimated promotional partners could add up to $15 million in the film's support.
Several tie-in video games were released to tie in with the film's release. Absolute Entertainment published Star Trek VII: Generations: Beyond the Nexus for the Game Boy and the Game Gear handheld devices. Three years after the film, MicroProse produced Star Trek VII: Generations, which featured the film's cast as voice actors. The game roughly followed the plot of the film with most of the game played in a first-person perspective.
Versions of the film's script leaked out in advance of the film. A bootleg script revealed the energy ribbon and Kirk's death; James Doohan confirmed the script's authenticity at a fan convention in March 1994, but his agent denied he had seen the finished script. In September, another copy of the film's script leaked onto the internet. As a result, news of Kirk's death was widespread.


Box office
Star Trek Generations was previewed in the United States and Canada on November 17, 1994, and grossed $3 million from 1,525 theaters. The film opened to a wide release in 2,659 theaters the following day and grossed $23.1 million during the opening weekend, averaging $8,694 per theatre. It was the highest-grossing film during the first week of its release in the United States, staying in the top ten for a further four weeks. The film went on to gross $75,671,125 in the United States and Canada and $42,400,000 internationally, making $118 million worldwide against a $35 million budget. In the United Kingdom, Generations opened on February 10, 1995, at number one with £2,040,000. In Japan, the film grossed $1.2 million its opening weekend, a large amount considering the franchise's usual poor performance in that market. Given its moderate budget, Generations's gross was considered a success.


Reception
Star Trek Generations earned mixed reviews from critics and fans. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 48% of 65 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "Generations stands as a mediocre changing of the guard for crews of the Enterprise, with a dull plot that sometimes seems like an expanded episode of the television series." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 55 out of 100, based on 22 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore assigned the film an average grade of "B+" on its A+ to F scale. Writing about the film decades later, Den of Geek described the film as divisive, and Tor.com noted the film had been picked apart for years by fans and the film's own writers. In 2001, the BBC gave it 2 of 5 stars, summarizing, "Devotees may find it necessary (if depressing) viewing."
Critics complained the film felt like an overly long episode of the television series. The Orlando Sentinel's Jay Boyar agreed, but said the film minimized the television series' tendency to "bog down" by moving to the next scene before boredom could set in. Kenneth Turan called the film safe, and said that it relied heavily on viewers' appreciation for the Star Trek television series. Jay Carr of The Boston Globe described the film as "reassuringly predictable", saying that it featured elements that would be recognizable by the fans of both series but that the lack of surprises was a benefit.
Cinefantastique's Steve Biodrowski praised some of the big-budget touches the film brought to the franchise, but wrote that most of the attempts such as John Alonzo's cinematography seemed to backfire. In contrast, Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer and Den of Geek's Chris Cummins praised Alonzo's work as one of the few bright spots of the film; "[Alonzo] makes the Enterprise look like an actual lived-in starship," Cummins wrote, and "for the first time ever, the crew of the Enterprise-D looked like they were truly in outer space". Elizabeth Renzetti from The Globe and Mail praised the film for its special effects, but felt they were not strong enough to cover the weak plotting.
Opinions were divided on whether or not the film was accessible to non-Star Trek fans. Critics such as The New York Times' Janet Maslin suggested that despite being "predictably flabby and impenetrable in places" and suffering from technobabble, there was enough action and spectacle to engage others. Boyar felt that specific plot beats would fly over the heads of casual viewers, but the film's innate sense of fun would keep them engaged. Others considered the film inaccessible to neophytes, and too preoccupied with fan-focused elements that detracted from the overall story, with Roger Ebert critiquing the movie as being "...so concerned with in-jokes and updates for Trekkers that it [could] barely tear itself away long enough to tell a story".
The meeting of Kirk and Picard prompted comparisons between the two respective actors; Stewart's performance was often considered superior. James Berardinelli and Ebert wrote that Kirk's lack of presence through much of the film was still keenly felt. Biodrowski wrote that Shatner's hammy acting was a better fit for the film than Stewart's subtle delivery, while Boyar thought Shatner did a good job playing a straight man in the final sequences and injecting more fun into the film. The Baltimore Sun's Stephen Hunter considered Shatner and Stewart emblematic of two different eras of stardom, and that Stewart's commanding presence "wipes poor, saintly old Shatner off the screen". Cinefantastique and others criticized the scenes between Kirk and Picard as lacking.
McDowell's turn as Soran received differing opinions. Berardinelli and Rickey called Soran a weak and ill-defined villain, and Hunter dismissed Soran as a nemesis unworthy of the titanic meeting of Kirk and Picard. People's Ralph Novak called Soran a "standard-issue Trek villain", while Maslin, Newsweek's Michel Marriott, and Entertainment Weekly's Lisa Schwarzbaum enjoyed the performance. Novak wrote that Data's subplot of learning about emotions was a highlight and probably the most enjoyable part of the film for non-fans, while Ebert said that the premise "could have led to some funny scenes, but doesn't". Coates summed up the subplot as "dreary".


Home media
Generations was released on LaserDisc in the United States on July 18, 1995, followed by a September release in Japan. It was also released on the United Kingdom in 1995 in the PAL format. The film was released in the UK on VHS on 28 December 1998. It was given a DVD release in 1998, with a non-anamorphic transfer and no special features. It later received a British DVD release on October 2, 2000. A new anamorphic transfer formed the basis of a 2004 special edition, with audio and text commentaries and special featurettes. The film was released on Blu-ray in 2009 as part of a box set of The Next Generation films, along with additional material. The four Next Generation feature films were released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on April 4, 2023, in standalone and collected formats.


References


External links

Official website
Star Trek: Generations at IMDb
Star Trek Generations at Memory Alpha

Steenstrup Glacier (Danish: Steenstrup Gletscher), is a glacier in NW Greenland. Administratively it belongs to the Avannaata municipality.
This glacier was named after Danish geologist and explorer of Greenland K. J. V. Steenstrup (1842 - 1913).


Geography
The Steenstrup Glacier is the largest and widest glacier in the Lauge Koch Coast, Melville Bay. It originates in the western side of the Greenland ice sheet and flows westwards between the Dietrichson Gletscher to the north and the Kjer Glacier to the south. Its terminus is just northeast of the Depot Islands and north of Red Head in the Melville Bay. The Kløftet Nunatak is located south, and the Kleinschmidt Nunatak rises on the northern side. 


See also
List of glaciers in Greenland


References


External links
Steenstrup Glacier, NW Greenland Releases New Island in 2017
Warming, glacier melt and surface energy budget

"Still a Thrill" is the second single from singer Jody Watley's self-titled debut album. It was released on April 27, 1987 through MCA Records.


History
While the #56 (US) peaking "Still a Thrill" didn't necessarily match the pop chart success of its blockbuster predecessor, "Looking for a New Love", it was a major hit on both the R&B and dance charts in 1987. Watley employed a deep lower register on this uptempo R&B / dance song, which she co-wrote. It was produced by Andre Cymone and David Z.


Covers
Indie Neo-soulsters, Soulscream, covered "Still a Thrill" on their 2001 album, Prototype @lpha1 2001 Neophunk. Synth-pop artist, Matthew Duffy, covered "Still a Thrill" on his album, Here I Come.


Legacy
T-Boz of TLC cited this song as an example setting her vocal tone for her singing career. In a personal video, she sent to Watley (and was given permission to share on her YouTube channel) T-Boz thanked Watley for this song during her teenage years citing she was "hitting them notes" and helping her sing at a lower register to better suit her vocal range.


Track listings
Non-UK 7-inch and cassette single

"Still A Thrill" - 4:12
"Looking For A New Love (A Cappella)" - 5:06
US 12-inch single

A1. "Still A Thrill" (Extended Version) – 8:39
B1. "Still A Thrill" (Radio Edit) – 6:15
B2. "Still A Thrill" (Instrumental) – 5:16
B3. "Still A Thrill" (A Cappella) – 4:41
B4. "Still A Thrill" (Bonus Beats) – 4:34


Charts


Weekly charts


Year-end charts


References

Stranded is a 1927 American silent romance film, directed by Phil Rosen. It stars Shirley Mason, William Collier Jr., and John Miljan, and was released on August 15, 1927.


Plot


Cast list
Shirley Mason as Sally Simpson
William Collier Jr. as Johnny Nash
John Miljan as Grant Payne
Florence Turner as Mrs. Simpson
Gale Henry as Lucille Lareaux
Shannon Day as Betty
Lucy Beaumont as Grandmother
Rosa Gore as Landlady


Preservation status
This film survives in the Library of Congress collection.
Edward Lorusso produced a restored version of the film for video with a new music score by David Drazin. (see IMDb external link)


References


External links
Stranded at IMDb
Stranded at the TCM Movie Database (archived)
Stranded at the AFI Catalog of Feature Films

Sturgeon Bay High School is a public high school located in Sturgeon Bay, Wisconsin. It is part of the Sturgeon Bay School District.


Athletics
Sturgeon Bay's athletic teams are known as the Clippers, and compete primarily in the Packerland Conference of the Wisconsin Interscholastic Athletic Association. The Clippers have won 14 WIAA state championships. Sturgeon Bay played football in the MONLPC (Marinette and Oconto, Northern Lakes, and Packerland) league until 2019, when low numbers forced them to move to eight-man football, where they play independently due to the school being too large to participate in eight-man football playoffs.


Athletic conference affiliation history
Northeastern Wisconsin Conference (1927-1970)
Packerland Conference (1970–present)


Notable alumni
Chris Greisen, football player
Nick Greisen, football player
Lawrence Johnson, politician
Anna Augusta Von Helmholtz-Phelan, professor, author
Casey Rabach, football player
Lloyd Wasserbach, football player
Frank N. Graass, politician


References

Styrax officinalis, commonly called the storax tree or snowdrop bush, is a species of shrub in the family Styracaceae.


Description
Styrax officinalis is a deciduous shrub reaching a height of 2–5 metres (7–16 ft). It has a simple, relaxed growth form with tight, dark bark on its basal stems. The very thin elliptical leaves are 5–10 cm (2–4 in) long by 3.5–5.5 cm (1+1⁄2–2 in) wide. They are alternate and widely spaced on thin, reddish stems, with a small, very light green, stalked axillary bud associated with each leaf.

The inflorescence is short and bears few flowers. The flowers themselves are axillary, bell-shaped, white, fragrant, and approximately 2 cm (1 in) long. The corolla features 5–7 petals surrounding many yellow anthers, and the calyx is 5-lobed. The flowering period extends from spring to summer (May–June).


Taxonomy
Three taxa formerly treated as subspecies—Styrax officinalis subsp. redivivus and Styrax officinalis subsp. fulvescens (both native to California), and Styrax officinalis subsp. jaliscana (native to Mexico)—were historically included within this species. However, molecular analysis has shown that they have diverged sufficiently to be recognized as separate species, S. redivivus and S. jaliscana; this taxonomic separation is now widely accepted.


Distribution
This species is native to southern Europe and the Middle East. It prefers dry rocky slopes, open woods, and thickets at altitudes of up to 1,500 metres (5,000 ft) above sea level.


Uses
This plant is the historical source of styrax (storax), a herbal medicine and perfume resin known since antiquity; it was formally identified as such by Linnaeus. Some scholars believe its oleoresin was the stacte used alongside frankincense, galbanum, and onycha to formulate Ketoret, the sacred Tabernacle incense offering of the Old Testament. 
The philosopher Averroës wrote regarding the reddish-brown oleoresin exudate taken from the storax tree. Similarly, Ibn Ǧanāḥ (c. 990–c. 1050), discussing the biblical incense ingredient galbanum in his Sefer Ha-Shorashim, noted: "And then there is ḥelbanah (galbanum) which is called in Arabic lūbnī," referring to the resin of the storax tree. 
However, some historical researchers speculate that the storax traded by the ancients may have actually been extracted from a different tree, Liquidambar orientalis (sweetgum), which grows wild in southwestern Turkey and northern Syria. This alternative plant source may also represent the historical biblical balm, though other botanical sources conclude that true biblical balm is derived from balsam (opobalsamum).


References


External links
Styrax officinalis

Sue Gross (born February 1950) is an American philanthropist and businesswoman. She was formerly the president of the William and Sue Gross Foundation, a charitable organization she co-founded with her then-husband, Bill H. Gross, an investor. In 2017, she established the Sue J. Gross Foundation to support healthcare, education, and community programs. As of July 2025, Forbes estimated her net worth at $1.6 billion.


Early life
Sue Gross, born Sue Frank in February 1950, in Phoenix, Arizona. She has two sisters, Sally Warpinski and Sandra Stubban. In 1985, she moved to Laguna Beach, California.


Career
Gross has served on several boards, including the Dean's Cabinet of the Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing at the University of California, Irvine, the Orange County Teacher of the Year program, and the Irvine Cove Community Board.


Philanthropy
Gross served as president of the William and Sue Gross Family Foundation and was responsible for approximately $700 million in grants to healthcare, medical research, and education.
In a 2016 Bloomberg interview, Bill Gross stated that Sue Gross managed the foundation's operations, saying, 'Sue's in charge of that. She spends all her time looking for opportunities, a lot of them local. I report to her.'
Sue is no longer connected to the foundation, a representative said, and has been running another under her name in recent years.
in January, 2005, Duke University in Durham, North Carolina announced a $23.5 million gift from Bill and Sue Gross to endow undergraduate and medical school scholarships, as well as support faculty members in the business school. Duke University president Richard H. Brodhead stated that the gift would support undergraduate and medical school scholarships and faculty positions in the business school. In 2010, they made a $10 million gift to fund a stem cell laboratory at UC Irvine. After seeing a “60 Minutes” report in 2012, the couple reportedly began writing anonymous $15,000 checks to workers laid off from the Space Shuttle program following NASA's termination of the program.
Bill and Sue Gross donated $40 million to the University of California, Irvine in 2016 to establish a nursing school and construct a building. According to the university, the gift was the largest in the institution's history.
Hospitals and research wings throughout the state bear the Gross family name. A gallery at the Smithsonian Institution housing their stamp collection was funded with a $10 million donation.
In 2017, Sue Gross established her charitable foundation, the Sue J. Gross Foundation.
The first announced donation was a portion of the $36.9 million in proceeds from Gross's sale of Pablo Picasso's “Le Repos”. She donated $35,000 in October 2018 to the inaugural Chef Masters event on behalf of the Alzheimer's Family Center in Orange County. She gave $5,000 to the Los Angeles Center for Law and Justice's 46th Annual Awards Gala in May 2019.


Personal life
In 1985, Sue Gross married Bill H. Gross, the billionaire co-founder of Pacific Investment Management Co. (PIMCO). The couple had one son, Nick Gross, a musician and entrepreneur. She was also stepmother to Bill Gross's two children from a previous marriage. The couple divorced in 2018.
Additionally, Gross collects fine art. In a 2015 letter to investors, Bill Gross described her as “the artist in the family”, noting that she often recreated famous artworks using an overhead projector and canvas, and quoted her saying, "Why spend $20 million? I can paint that one for $75". 
A painting styled after Picasso, signed by Sue, was displayed in their home. During their divorce proceedings, one point of contention was Pablo Picasso’s 1932 painting Le Repos. According to reports, Sue Gross won the painting in a coin toss.
Bill Gross later alleged the original had been replaced with a copy, though court testimony indicated he had told her to “take all the furniture and art you'd like”. A representative for Sue Gross stated the imitation was distinguishable due to a different frame.
Sue Gross filed for divorce in November, 2016. She later requested a temporary restraining order, citing alleged harassment, and both parties were granted restraining orders at different points during the proceedings. The divorce settlement awarded Sue Gross approximately $1.3 billion, including a $36 million home in Laguna Beach and half of the couple's extensive art collection.


Real estate
Gross owns four of the twelve homes in Abalone Point, a gated section of Laguna Beach’s Irvine Cove community. She also holds properties in Palm Springs and Beverly Hills. In December 2024, she sold a Beverly Hills residence with four bedrooms and four and a half bathrooms for $33 million, approximately six percent below the $35 million asking price. The 6,569‑square‑foot home had been purchased in 2018 for $20 million.


References

Sufasar was a Roman town, one of many in Roman North Africa. Sufasar faded with the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The site has been tentatively identified with ruins at Amourah in modern Algeria.
Sufasar was also the seat, of an ancient bishopric, Metropolitan of Caesarea Mauretaniae (modern Cherchell).
Its bishop, Urbanus, was one of the Catholic bishops whom the Arian Vandal king Huneric summoned to a conference in Carthage in 484 and then exiled.


Bishopric


Titular see
Gaston-Marie Jacquier (1960-1976)
Stanislaw Adam Sygnet (1976-1985)
André Vallée (1987-1996)
José Benjamín Castillo Plascencia (1999-2003)
Claude Champagne (2003-2009)
Augustinus Kim Jong-soo (2009-2022)
Francisco Javier Acero Pérez (2022-present)


References

Suh Byung-soo (Korean: 서병수; born 9 January 1952) is a South Korean politician who served as the mayor of Busan from 2014 to 2018. He previously served as the Member of the National Assembly for Haeundae-Gijang A constituency from 2002 to 2014 and the as the mayor of Haeundae from 2000 to 2002.
A member of the conservative People Power Party, Suh was elected the Mayor of Busan on 4 June 2014, defeating the independent candidate Oh Keo-don. In 2018, he ran for re-election but lost to Oh, who ran under the Democratic banner.


Early life
Suh Byung-soo was born in 1952, in the town of Daun, Ulsan, South Gyeongsang (now Daun-dong, Central District, Ulsan), to the son of Suh Seok-in (died in 2020), the founder of Woojin Service who had served as the Member of the Busan Metropolican Council from 1991 to 1995 and the Mayor of Haeundae from 1995 to 1998. His mom died in February 1997. He is the eldest among 4 sons and a daughter to the ex-Haeundae Mayor; he is the brother to Suh Ha-soo, Suh Hyun-soo and Suh Bum-soo. Although he was born in Ulsan, he grew up in Yeongdo, Busan.
He went to 3 different schools — Yeongdo Primary School, Busan Secondary School and Kyungnam High School. He later attended Sogang University and received a bachelor's and a master's degree in economics. Then, he fled to the United States and received a doctorate in economics from Northern Illinois University in 1987. Following the graduation, he briefly worked at Ford Motor Company before he returned to South Korea and continued his career at Korea Institute of Machinery and Materials and Presidential Advisory Council on Science and Technology. In 1990s, he was the CEO of Woojin Service, succeeding his father who had resigned in order to run for the 1991 local elections. He served till the end of 1997, however, in 2000, some sources reported that he was still serving the position at that time. This time, he was also an adjunct professor at Dong-Pusan College.


Political career
In the 2000 by-elections, Suh ran as the Grand National Party (GNP)'s nominee for the Mayor of Haeundae and was elected, defeating 2 independent candidates (the then-ruling Millennium Democratic Party aka MDP did not put a candidate). He succeeded the predecessor Shin Joong-bock, whose election was annulled for violating the election law in 1999. He promised to attract both foreign and private capitals and make the district as a logistic hub for information and tourism. Under his mayorship, he had successfully fixed hawker stalls at Hoan Road and built Moontan Road.
He resigned on 7 February 2002 in order to run for the MP for Haeundae-Gijang 1st constituency at the by-election called due to the death of Sohn Tae-in. He won with 27,961 votes, defeating the MDP candidate Choi In-ho. In the 2004 election, he again contested with Choi In-ho who ran under the Uri Party banner in this time. Despite coming behind in exit polls, he successfully beat his rival. Shortly after the re-election in 2008, he served as the Chairman of the Strategy and Finance Committee, for this time, he suggested an amendment of the Tax Law and Bank of Korea Act, including tax reduction. In 2010, he was elected as a Vice President of the GNP.
In the 2012 election, Suh contested under the Saenuri banner and defeated the DFP-UFP unity candidate, Goh Chang-kwon, with a majority of 18,705 votes. He was a potential candidate for the Saenuri parliamentary leader, but some media suggested he could be "nominated" the position under the interim President Park Geun-hye. Known as the "Nominee List", on 25 April, he finally declared to not seek for the position. On 21 May, under the new President Hwang Woo-yea, he was appointed the party's Secretary-General. As the Secretary-General, he contributed its presidential candidate Park Geun-hye to be elected to the position in December.


Mayor of Busan


2014 mayoral election
On 26 February 2014, Suh officially launched his bid for Busan mayorship at Daehang Saebaji Harbour, Gadeokdo. Following are the manifestos included in his declaration:

Building the new airport (replacing the incumbent Gimhae International Airport) in Gadeokdo
Developing West Busan as a rich riverside city with future high-tech industries and cultural infrastructures
Creating 200,000 of new jobs, including 50,000 of stable jobs
Redeveloping:
industrial complexes in North, Sasang and Saha District
North Port
55 Supply Depot and railway sites
He contested with the former Sasang MP and the ex-ambassador to Japan Kwon Chul-hyun and the then North-Gangseo MP Park Min-shik at the Saenuri preselection. On 3 April, he relinquished his parliamentary membership in order to focus on his campaign. On 30 April, he gained 36.9% and defeated 2 ex-MPs.
Though he led at the beginning, he was expected to lose after the NPAD candidate Kim Young-choon abandoned his campaign and endorsed the independent candidate Oh Keo-don, the former Minister of Oceans and Fisheries who had ever been run for 2 times before. On 4 June, he narrowly beat the former Oceans and Fisheries Minister by a margin of approximately 2%.


Mayoralty
Suh was sworn into office on 1 July 2014, approximately a month after the election. He promised "Citizens First" policies and the "Nakdong River Era". Prior to the inauguration, he put a slogan "Happy Citizens, Healthy Busan".
Since before the election, he pledged to build the new airport (replacing the incumbent Gimhae International Airport) in Gadeokdo and to resign should the manifesto would not be fulfilled. On 21 June 2016, the Government of Park Geun-hye had brought a decision in which they would expand the incumbent Gimhae Airport, instead of replacing it in either Gadeokdo or Miryang, recommended by the ADP Ingénierie. The Government's determination was criticised as "breaking a promise" from the opposition parties, including the Democratic Party and the People's Party, despite the reactions from the Blue House. There were earlier prognoses that Suh would stand down for taking responsibilities; in fact, a day before the governmental determination, he ensured "no alternatives except at Gadeokdo". On 27 June, however, he confirmed he would accept the Government's decision and would not step down as Mayor.

On 16 August 2017, Lotte Corporation had donated 100 billion won (≒ 100 million US$) to Busan for the Opera House development at North Port. Suh emphasised that the Opera House would not just be a cultural complex for citizens, but also become a tourist attraction and a new workplaces. The construction was begun on 22 May 2018.
On 21 September, the Busan City Government announced perhaps they would purchase 100 billion won to build a landmark, which is the Statue of Liberty, as a part of the North Harbour Redevelopment. The location was not confirmed yet, but probably nearby Shinseondae Quay, Yongdang-dong, South District. According to the plan, the construction would begin in 2020 and be completed by 2022. There were criticisms that whether the city is possible to proceed with the project despite having too many debts. The City Government reacted they have not made any decisions yet.


2018 mayoral election

Prior to the 2018 local elections, the Liberty Korea Party (LKP) was agonising over preselection for Busan mayorship. On 16 March 2018, the LKP confirmed the party had nominated Suh as its candidate, instead of holding a preselection. Lee Jong-hyuk, one of potential rival close to the party president Hong Jun-pyo, announced his departure from the party due to his objection towards the decision. Lee, then, launched his bid to run as an independent candidate.
On 3 April, the Democratic Party confirmed they would nominate Oh Keo-don, who had unsuccessfully stood 4 years ago, as its candidate. Therefore, Suh faced the 2nd competition with Oh.
However, according to the opinion polls of Realmeter on 5 May, Suh came far behind Oh (Oh: 57.7%, Suh: 27.1%). As of June, he failed to narrow the interval between the Democratic candidate. On 13 June, he only received 37.16% and was finally defeated to Oh. The LKP also lost many of its district mayors and metropolitan council members to the Democratic Party.


Post-mayorship
On 5 March 2020, Suh was selected the MP candidate for Busanjin 1st constituency at the 2020 election. Many polls showed neck and neck with the Democratic candidate Kim Young-choon, but Suh successfully defeated Kim.
Shortly after his comeback to the National Assembly, Oh Keo-don resigned as the Mayor of Busan on 23 April following the allegations of sexual harassment has provoked the by-election in 2021. As the incident provoked a by-election in 2021, Suh became one of the potential candidate to the position, and he also indicated that he was considering to run. Nevertheless, on 21 December, he announced not to contest the election. Several sources reported that he was backing the former Deputy Mayor Park Seong-hun at the PPP preselection, and on 23 February 2021, he left some positive comments about the former Deputy Mayor.
On the other hand, Park Seong-hun lost to the former MP for Suyeong Park Hyung-joon, whom Suh criticised as "incapable" to the position, at the PPP preselection on 4 March.


Election results


General elections


Local elections


Mayor of Haeundae


Mayor of Busan


References


External links
Suh Byung-soo on Facebook
Suh Byung-soo on YouTube
Suh Byung-soo on Instagram
Suh Byung-soo on Blog

T3 was an independent advertising agency. Its headquarters were located in Austin, Texas and also had offices in New York City, Atlanta, and San Francisco. The agency, which focused on building brands, was founded in 1989 by CEO Gay Gaddis and was acquired by LRW in 2019. T3 was one of the largest independent agencies owned by a woman in the United States, with capitalized billings over $230 million.(registration required)  


Clients

T3's clients include Allstate and UPS.
ecent & Extended Client / Case Study Highlights
Client / Brand	Notes / What the Work Was About	Source
Allstate	Insurance client of T3. 
Wikipedia
UPS	Another long-standing client. 
Wikipedia

These are confirmed in the official Wikipedia page. 
Wikipedia
Additional & Related Clients / Work
Some are direct clients of T3; others are case studies or related to companies called “T3” (so be mindful which “T3” is meant).
Dell, Samsung, Nortel Networks, JCP Media — These are clients listed for “T3 (The Think Tank)” in an agency profile. It may not be exactly the same “T3 (Austin)” but shows association under similar name. 

T3 Micro — A client of other firms (e.g. Guidance, Dotdigital) in case studies. For example, T3 Micro (hair-styling tools brand) had its e-commerce, site redesign, localization work done. 

Franchisors, Brokerages, Realtor associations, MLS organizations, technology companies, real-estate investors / analysts — These are clients of T3 Sixty, which is a different entity (consultancy / advisory firm in real estate)


Work and awards
T3 ranks among AdWeek's Top 100 Agencies and Advertising Age's 2006 Top 100 U.S. Marketing Services Agencies lists.
T3 has experience in both traditional and digital media across various verticals: Automotive, consumer goods, financial, government, healthcare, non-profit, retail, service, technology and travel. Within the digital realm, T3 offers analytics, application development, mobile, online advertising, web architecture and development, video, social and email. T3 created Coca-Cola Freestyle's first mobile app, PUSH! + Play for the iPhone and Android.
Work includes Wall Street Journal's "Every Journey Needs a Journal" site, JCPenney's desktop application, JCPToday, Dell's Virtual Office, and Marriott's Plug-In Site.
August 2011: CEO, Gay Gaddis was named one of the Top 10 Hottest Digital Marketers by iMedia.


Leadership
Chief Executive Officer: Ben Gaddis
Chief Operating Officer: Christian Barnard
SVP, Chief Creative Officer: Jay Suhr


Family-friendly policies
"T3 and Under" is the agency's in-house childcare program that allows parents to bring their babies to work until they are nine months old. T3's workplace programs have been recognized by the White House, The Today Show, The New York Times, Fortune Small Business and Good Morning America.


See also
List of companies based in Austin, Texas


References

TAMEK is a Turkish food and beverage company founded in 1955. It is a pioneer in the Turkish food sector. They are the first producers of tomato paste and ketchup in all Turkey. They are also the first Turkish producer of many other canned foods.


History
Tamek was founded in Demirtaş  village of Osmangazi district of Bursa Province on March 31, 1955. The name consists of the initials of the Turkish German Fruit Extracts Company. It was founded by Mehmet Sipahioglu in cooperation with a German partner, who left after a year, making TAMEK 100% Turkish from then on. Tamek was the first producer of ketchup in Turkey, making the product available to consumers in 1958.
In 1959, Tamek was the first producer of ready to eat food and stuffed vegetables in Turkey. Tamek's famous brown bottle fruit juice was created in their first plant in Demirtaş, Bursa in 1963. The first boiled and canned legume in Turkey were produced by TAMEK in 1974. In 1987, they started the production of several products in their Karacabey, Bursa plant. These included paste, canned foods, pea, jam, fruit concentrate and marmalade. Diabetic jam in Turkey was also first produced by TAMEK in 1992. In 1993, the first canned fruit juice was available in Turkey thanks to TAMEK. Production started in the plant at Kızıksa town of Manyas district in Balıkesir Province in 1994, where they started producing tomato paste, fruit concentrate, ketchup and mayonnaise. The first paste packed in a cardboard box was made available in Turkey by TAMEK in 2000. In 2001, TAMEK's first plant in Demirtaş was converted into a facility producing solely fruit juice. In 2002, the plant in Salihli of Manisa Province started production, and its products were paste, boiled food, ready to eat food, stuffed vegetables, canned okra and fruit concentrates. Also in 2002, TAMEK sold the beverage brand Fruko. to PepsiCo. In 2005, the first  'Body Sleeve' packaging was used in ketchup and mayonnaise. In 2006, TAMEK started production of Turkey's first additive-free and preservative-free products. In 2014, TAMEK was the first user of Crystal Tetrapacks for their fruit juices in Turkey. In 2017, TAMEK started to produce their fruit juice on their signature brown bottles again.


Current Events
TAMEK sent food aid to Soma following the Soma mine disaster. The food items, totaling 25 tonnes and worth ₺ 30 million, were given to the Soma office of the Kizilay humanitarian organization.
TAMEK is the 2nd most consumed juice brand in Edirne coming in at 19.8% of the consumption.


External links
Bloomberg Company Profile
Merkezi Kayıt Kuruluşu A.Ş. (Central Registry Agency)


Sources
FOROUGH HESAMI GHAHRAMANLOU (2014). "5" (Master's Thesis). NEXT GENERATION OF EMERGING MARKETS, EXPORT POSSIBILITIES OF TURKISH FRUIT JUICE AND CONCENTRATE TO LIBYA (Report). Istanbul: Bahçeşehir University. p. 28. Retrieved 3 March 2018.
"Tamek Gida Ve Konsantre San Ve Tic As". wabel.com. WABEL ONLINE. Retrieved 3 March 2018. TAMEK Food & Concentrate was founded in 1955, exports to over 70 countries worldwide. Headquarter is located in Istanbul and has three factories where below product groups are produced:•Tomato & Pepper Pastes•Jam & Marmalades•Ready to eat meals•Canned Vegetables•Ketchup and Mayonnaise•Stewed pulses•Fruit juice concentrates & Fruit juices
Sebnem Burnaz; Y. Ilker Topcu (8 July 2003). A MULTI-CRITERIA DECISION MODEL FOR TURKISH SOFT DRINK INDUSTRY (PDF) (Report). Honolulu/Maçka: Istanbul Technical University, Management Faculty. p. 3. S2CID 18165257. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-10-16. Retrieved 3 March 2018.


References

Tarannum Riyaz (9 August 1960 – 20 May 2021) was an Indian writer and a senior fellow with the Indian Ministry of Culture.


Biography
Tarannum Riyaz was born on 9 August 1960. Students in several universities in India have done their M.Phil. and Ph.D. research on the works of Tarannum Riyaz. She lectured in institutions of art and literature in India and abroad. Her books are part of the curriculum in different levels of educational institutions in India.


Death
Riyaz died from COVID-19 in 2021, a month after the death of her husband, Riyaz Punjabi.


Published works
"Zer e Sabza Mehw e Khwaab" (poetry – 2015)
"Ajnabee Jazeeron Men" (essays – 2015)
"Bhadon K Chaand Taley" (poetry – 2015)
Barf Aashna Parindey (novel – 2009, second edition 2010; Hindi edition 2013)
Meraa Rakhte Safar (short stories – 2008)
Fareb E Khitta E Gul (4 novellas – 2008)
Purani Kitaabon Ki Khusbhu (poetry – 2005)
Chashme Naqshe Kadam (critical essay – 2005)
Beeswi Sadi Mein Khawateen Ka Urdu Adab (anthology – 2005)
Moorti (novel – 2002)
Yimberzal (short stories – 2002)
Abbabeelain Laut Aaengi (short stories – 2000)
Yeh Tang Zameen (short stories – 1998)


References

Tatiana Lvovna Davydova (Russian: Давыдова, Татьяна Львовна) (September 18 [O.S. September 6] 1861, in Kamianka, Chigirinsky uyezd, Kiev province, Russian Empire – January 31 [O.S. January 19] 1887 or February 1 [O.S. January 20] 1887, St. Petersburg, Russian Empire) was the niece of Russian composer Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky. She is the elder sister of Vladimir and Yuri Davydovs.
Tchaikovsky's biographer Valery Sokolov distinguished two periods in Tatyana Davydova's life — the fortunate (until 1879) and the "dramatic" (1879–1887).
Tatiana was the eldest daughter of the composer's sister Alexandra and her husband Lev Davydov. Tchaikovsky was close to his niece, dedicating Six Vocal Duets (Op. 46) to her, and when she became pregnant by pianist Stanislav Blumenfeld in 1883, the composer and his brother Modest took Tatiana to Paris and arranged for her to give birth. After she gave birth to a boy, the composer himself registered the child's birth, arranged for his baptism, and provided financial support. Tchaikovsky participated in his adoption by his older brother Nikolai. Valery Sokolov wrote: "The niece was destined to become one of the deep wounds in Pyotr Ilyich's soul, the scars of which remained for a very long time". Tatiana Davydova died, probably of a morphine overdose, in St. Petersburg at the age of 25. She was buried in the cemetery of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra, but the place of her burial has not been preserved".
In 2021 the Russian composer and music historian Valery Sokolov dedicated to Tatiana Davydova a large (110 pages) article Tatiana Davydova in the life of P. I. Tchaikovsky in the collection of scientific publications St. Petersburg Musical Archive, published under the auspices of the Tchaikovsky Society. In it he reconstructed the biography of the girl and tried to determine the role of her problems in the life and work of the composer.


Biography


Childhood and youth
Tatiana Lvovna Davydova (Tchaikovsky called her Tanya, Tanyusha, Tanyurka, Tanka in his letters and diaries) was born on September 6 [18], 1861, in the estate Kamianka in the Chigirinsky district of Kiev province, where her parents, Alexandra Ilinichna (Tchaikovsky's sister) and Lev Vasilyevich Davydov, lived permanently. Pyotr Ilyich responded to this event with a poem of his own composition, which included the line: "Let's celebrate, great Tatiana! Rejoice, all Russia".
In early childhood, Tatiana demonstrated remarkable abilities. By the age of four, she had already learned to read and spoke fluent French. At the same time, the girl, under the guidance of her mother, began piano lessons and already performed four-handed with Alexandra Davydova Red Sarafan by Aleksandr Varlamov, Chizhik-Pyzhik, and "the first scale" . For some time, Alexandra Davydova noted great successes in her daughter's mastery of the instrument, but in 1868, a new governess, who had a musical education, criticized the girl's musical skills and forced her to return to the scales and engage in musical theory.
In the summer of 1870, Tatiana and her mother visited St. Petersburg for the first time. Returning to Kamianka, in January 1872, the girl began studying English. In letters to Tchaikovsky, Alexandra Davydova asked him to send the notes of complex etudes for piano to Tatiana and her sisters but noted the emergence of difficulties in their upbringing — "it is a pity to look at yawning girls".
David Brown, a British researcher of Tchaikovsky's work, claimed that the origins of the idea for the ballet Swan Lake date back to 1871, when the family of Alexandra Davydova, with the active participation of the composer himself, staged an amateur production of this very plot in the estate of Kamianka. Pyotr Ilyich acted as stage director and ballet master, as well as providing musical accompaniment ("Uncle Pyotr, with a flushed face, wet with sweat, when he sang the melody, presented quite an amusing spectacle"). His younger brother Modest danced the Prince, and little Tatiana Davydova performed the role of Odette. Also, with the active assistance of Tchaikovsky, and with Tatiana's participation, were staged the plays the Misanthrope by Molière and Marriage by Nikolai Gogol.
In the fall of 1873, Alexandra Davydova and her children moved to Switzerland, where the Davydovs lived first in one of the main centers of the Swiss Riviera — the city of Vevey (1873–1874), and then in Geneva (1874–1876). Only then did the mother think about the need for the systematic education of her elder daughters in a private or public school.
The 12-year-old Tatiana Davydova was assigned to a school of the highest level (French école supérieure) in Vevey. Before that, Pyotr Ilyich went there to find out the possibilities of boarding schooling for his sister's two older daughters. Tatiana studied well, but the music teacher, "a certain Rotzenberg," a graduate of the Stuttgart Conservatory, "irritable and strict," inspired fear in the girl. He taught according to the "Rubinstein method" and charged 5 francs per hour. As a punishment for poor playing, he strongly beat Tatiana on her hands. Her mother, in a letter to her brother Modest, noted that Tatiana was a "windy" and "spoiled" girl, with a "fastidiousness of character". Alexandra Davydova wrote: "Her innocent pranks are endless, and she has become such a master of making fun that I tolerate, tolerate, yes, and rashohochuchuchuchatu. This difficult child only now began to get along with everyone and please me". That Tatiana was a difficult child in her early years was also noted in the memoirs of her niece, Galina von Meck. Tatiana took lessons in dancing and physics, which she noted as the most interesting in her letter, and practiced the Russian language.
It was in Switzerland that Tatiana Davydova's painful condition began to gradually increase: "All these days I have a strong flush to my head, my face is quite blue and a little swollen... nothing helps, and my head hurts a lot". At the same time, she had a growing sense of dissatisfaction with herself: "I lost the last shadows of beauty in me, and I myself am often frightened by the extent to which I am manipulative. I can make friends with anyone and imitate his habits, knowing that it is not good and dishonest. Then I feel that I do not love God enough and do not pray enough".
Since the summer of 1874, Tatiana and her sisters began attending public high school in Geneva. The girl made great strides in playing the zither and became, to her mother's worries, the central figure at the school ball. It was at this time that she first became interested in the works of Pyotr Ilyich and asked to have his works sent to Switzerland. From time to time, Tatiana took piano and harp lessons at the Geneva Conservatory. Alexandra Davydova even wrote in a letter to Modest Tchaikovsky that before leaving Switzerland, Tatiana participated in a certain concours de musique (French for "musical examination", as interpreted by Valery Sokolov) at the conservatory. The composer, who visited the Davydov family in Geneva, noted: "Tania has lost the appearance of an idle young lady here and therefore makes a very pleasant impression".
"At the age of 14–15, Tatiana Lvovna looked like a perfect beauty... Beautiful, intelligent, kind girl, Tatiana Lvovna gained numerous admirers early on. In Switzerland, several students of various colleges quarreled to gain her attention", her younger brother Yuri wrote in his memoirs.
In the spring of 1876, the head of the family decided to return his wife and children to Russia. In July of the same year, Alexandra Davydova and the children returned to her husband's estate. The pianist Stanislav Blumenfeld was invited from Kiev to teach her music. Her mother made plans to enroll the girl in university. At this time, however, Tchaikovsky wrote about Tatiana as his mother's "sore spot" and feared that "the closed sphere of family life is insufficient for her talented personality". In his opinion, "she is already weighed down by her fate".
In 1877, the attention of the Davydov family living in Kamianka turned to the problems of Pyotr Ilyich in connection with his failed marriage and severe mental crisis. Tatiana and Tchaikovsky's wife Antonina Miliukova, who came to Kamianka, became friends. Soon, however, their relationship escalated sharply. When Miliukova said that she wanted to commit suicide, Tatiana sharply replied, "Go now, but do not say it, because it is ridiculous: who wants to commit suicide does not talk about it." Sokolov assumed that the reason for this turn of affairs was Tatiana's impression of her favorite uncle's difficult experiences.
A complete surprise for the mother was the discovery of Tatiana's note shortly after the girl's 16th birthday (with the orthography of the original and the reconstruction of Valery Sokolov's punctuation): "Bury me close to Seryozha, I ask only for a marble slab and on it the name Tatyana, with no cross (?) at the feet[:] 'She did not love life and had no regrets!'" Sokolov assumed that the girl's mental trauma was related to one of her two young teachers, either Blumenfeld or the teacher who prepared her for university, a senior student of the Kiev Theological Academy, Bernatovich.


Adulthood
Alexander Poznansky, an American biographer of Tchaikovsky, wrote that even before Tatiana was born, her parents dreamed of a "fabulous future" for their daughter. She was always a family favorite. Under the influence of universal adoration, Tatiana herself believed in her own exceptionalism.
Since the winter of 1878/1879, the Davydovs perceived their daughter as a grown-up young lady: in St. Petersburg, she went to theaters, balls, picnics, flirted, and attracted the attention of secular society. Her participation "in the court ball" and presentation to Emperor Alexander II were planned. Returning to Kamianka, Tatiana tried to continue leading a social life. In 1879, during a trip to Yalta, Tatiana attracted the close attention of two men at once — Prince Alexei Tsereteliev (Tsereteli) and 35-year-old Oryol landowner Koshkarov, who even made her an offer. Tchaikovsky was outraged by the latter fact, writing that Koshkarov was old and ugly, "but very clever and managed to interest Tanya with his uniqueness and authentic personality". Tatiana's new promising young man was Prince Trubetskoy, aged 24, an officer awarded the Cross of St. Georgy, "extremely handsome, kind, and sweet." He also made her a "formal proposal." The composer's niece gave her consent, but subject to the approval of the marriage by the groom's parents. They, who had once lived with their children in Vevey at the same time as the Davydovs, spoke favorably of the marriage but were unable to provide for their son financially. Their attempts to place him in the civil service for this reason postponed the marriage indefinitely.
In the fall of 1880, Tatiana went to Yalta again. She was introduced to Maria Feodorovna, the wife of the throne's successor Alexander Alexandrovich, the future Emperor Alexander III, and met Praskovia Konshina, who later became the wife of the statesman, senator, and Privy Councillor Anatoly Tchaikovsky — the composer's younger brother.
Some time later, Tatiana became close to one of the officers of the Hussar regiment near Kamianka. She wrote: "Glavatsky is in love with me, with me alone, and only with grief from my indifference fell in love with Vera, and told me that he was ready to kiss the whip with which I will beat him or something like that! ... After the ball, Glavatsky spoke to my mother and asked for the hand of both of us!" Valery Sokolov noted the seriousness of the religious, philosophical, and aesthetic issues raised in this letter of a 19-year-old girl (Tatiana discussed the prose of Fyodor Dostoevsky and Sergei Aksakov), but wrote that such topics in her correspondence are almost never found.
Tatiana's health continued to deteriorate: she "suffers from a completely incomprehensible disease for such a young girl — gastric catarrh. This disease is expressed by a complete lack of appetite, frequent colic, sickness, anemia, and premature and unhealthy obesity". Tchaikovsky, in a letter to Nadezhda von Meck, described the appearance of his two nieces, Tatiana and Vera: "As for the color of their hair and eyes: both have blue eyes, and their hair is blonde. However, not the lightest shade... The complexion of both nieces is pale, at the slightest excitement turning into a bright blush on the cheeks, as it generally happens with girls suffering from anemia". In December 1880, Tatiana Davydova's health deteriorated sharply ("she is haunted by headaches and all kinds of nervous attacks", "for 15 days that she has been out of bed, she does not get up and only incessantly suffers and weakens; no food, she vomits everything that she eats in moments of improvement"). Relatives attributed this to the indefinitely postponed marriage with Trubetskoy. In 1881, Alexandra Davydova took her daughter to Kiev for medical treatment.
It was Alexandra Davydova who, according to Alexander Poznansky, offered her daughter morphine, which she herself used for mood elevation and as a painkiller. The drug worked for a while but had an addictive effect.
In April 1881, the situation with Trubetskoy began to clear up. He retired and went into the civil service with a small salary of 600 rubles a year. Trubetskoy's father died, and the estate he inherited was ruined. Tatiana Davydova could receive 3000 rubles a year from her father but was, as Pyotr Ilyich put it, "very impractical and very spoiled." The young people were engaged, and the marriage was scheduled for the fall. On May 5, there was an unexpected rupture between the young people. According to Tchaikovsky's version, Trubetskoy "appeared to Tatiana in Moscow drunk and said many insulting words". The composer's American biographer even claimed that he tried to rape her. The girl threw her wedding ring in his face and demanded that he never show up again.
Sokolov put forward several hypotheses at once as to the causes of the breaking of the engagement:

Trubetskoy's family's financial problems led them to find him a rich bride.
Tatiana Davydova's frivolous behavior and the consequences of her drug consumption were notable. Anatoly Tchaikovsky at this time noted that Tatiana "is not only seriously ill but, no doubt, mentally, nervously, and psychologically... I am simply afraid that she will do something terrible".
The low moral qualities of the prince himself were also evident. On May 2, the eve of the rupture, Anatoly Tchaikovsky met with Trubetskoy, who told him that he "went to look for brothels but could not find any good girls, and asked for a recommendation".
Tatiana returned to Kamianka "in a state close to insanity, all soaked in ether, morphine, and all sorts of horrors. She was even drinking in Moscow". Tchaikovsky wrote that the girl "considers herself dishonored, lost, unworthy to accept the caresses of relatives, because Trubetskoy was kept by her at the cost of straining all her strength only where everything was over" (Valery Sokolov believed that he meant an intimate relationship with the former fiancé). Tatiana screamed, sobbed, and convulsed in the composer's arms. Pyotr Ilyich himself tried to calm and distract her from her gloomy thoughts by talking to her, playing four-handed piano with her, and encouraging her to read.
For a short time, Tatiana Davydova met with Stanislav Bernatovich, head of the traffic service of the Fastov railroad. He was married, so the girl made plans to marry him after her lover's divorce from his wife. After the breakup with him, she began an affair with a rich merchant, Otto Kern, a German by birth. Kern made Tatiana an offer, but the girl evaded a direct answer. Her parents opposed the marriage, as Kern was not an aristocrat. In the spring of 1882, Tatiana resumed relations with pianist Stanislav Blumenfeld, who had previously been her private music teacher. One of their secret dates was witnessed by Pyotr Ilyich. He had once recommended the young pianist to the Davydovs, but now his intimacy with his niece irritated him. With indignation, he wrote that the girl allows herself with Blumenfeld what, according to his ideas, is peculiar only to prostitutes. Tatiana got pregnant, but her relatives did not notice it for a long time.
Tatiana moved to St. Petersburg, and the cover for the upcoming birth was provided by Pyotr (he was simply put in front of the fact of pregnancy in January 1883) and Modest Tchaikovsky, as well as her aunt Vera Butakova. Following this, the girl moved to Paris, where the composer was already staying, under the pretext of being treated for drug addiction by the then-famous psychiatrist and neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot. Modest, who had accompanied the girl, returned to Russia in mid-April, and all responsibility for her fate fell on the shoulders of Pyotr Ilyich. Valery Sokolov believed that already then the childless Nikolai Tchaikovsky had a plan to adopt his niece's future child. The boy, named Georgy, was born in Paris on April 26, 1883.
Another version of events is presented by Galina von Meck. In her version, the parents learned that Tatiana was pregnant. Davydova was sent abroad, and her son was born in Paris. The young mother could not return to the estate with her illegitimate son, so the eldest of the Tchaikovsky brothers adopted him. Tatiana, after giving birth in Paris, made the decision never to see Blumenfeld again, but she never forgot him. According to Galina von Meck, he was the girl's only love.
In May 1883, Tatiana returned to Kamianka. The family perceived her, according to Modest Tchaikovsky, as "a guest". In September of that year, she went to Paris to see Charcot's collaborator Dr. Ferret again, informing her family that she was going to marry him. However, she was accompanied on the trip by Kern, who, like those around her, was also convinced that she was ready to become Ferret's wife. Upon arriving in Paris, Tatiana learned that Ferret was marrying his compatriot. Treatment for addiction to the drug continued with alternating cold and hot water, but Davydova practically did not leave the house and remained bedridden. The state of her health was serious, and Tchaikovsky, realizing that "she has no interest in life and that nothing occupies and interests her," offered his niece the opportunity to make a career as an actress in France, without informing his own family.
In August 1884, Tatyana Davydova returned to Kamianka. Her mother noted a significant improvement in her health. In the winter of 1884 to 1885, the girl lived in Moscow with her sister Anna, who had married Nadezhda von Meck's son Nikolai. It seemed to those around her that she had returned to normal life: "sits, walks, and is very much in spirit," but she no longer seemed attractive to those around her. Davydova spent the winter of 1885 to 1886 with her mother and brothers in St. Petersburg. In mid-June, the composer brought her young son to the capital, where he was adopted by Nikolai Tchaikovsky.


Last years
The supposed recovery of her daughter by her relatives allowed Alexandra Tchaikovskaya, in 1886, to make Tatiana the tutor of her younger brothers Dmitry and Vladimir, who were studying and living at that time in St. Petersburg. Valery Sokolov believed that from the end of 1884 to 1887, she changed in many ways. Tatiana Davydova became calmer, her health was returning, and she devoted a lot of time to her household and the upbringing of her brothers. At the same time, he admitted that "loved ones simply 'waved goodbye' to the possibility of her full recovery, stopped dramatizing her problems, and resigned themselves to the possibility of her death".
Tatiana Davydova died, according to various accounts, on January 19 or January 20 [February 1], 1887 in St. Petersburg. During a masquerade ball in the capital, she suddenly collapsed and soon died of a heart attack. Valery Sokolov thought it more accurate to date Davydova's death on January 20, noting that the masquerade was held late into the night. The newspaper Novoe Vremya dedicated a note to her death:
Today, at one o'clock at midnight, in the midst of a brilliant masquerade in the Noble Assembly, a tragic event occurred: a young woman of twenty-five, Mrs. Tatiana Davydova, died suddenly of a heart attack. She had hardly had time to be carried out of the hall to the restroom: her face immediately became lifeless, her eyes drooped, and her lower lip sagged. The champagne demanded by General Gresser only revived her for a few minutes. She had come to the masquerade in the company of a companion. The closest immediate cause of paralysis was, according to the doctor's certification, a tight corset. In addition, it was certified that the patient suffered from morphinomania. At the masquerade, attended by the Minister of Foreign Affairs N. K. Giers, French Ambassador de Laboulaye, the Spanish envoy Campo-Sagrado, the entire staff of the German, French, and Japanese embassies, and almost all of St. Petersburg's court and official nobility.
The second note, with a slightly different explanation of the cause of death, was published by Peterburgskaya Gazeta:
It was exactly 12:30 a.m. when Mrs. Davydova, strolling through the hall on the arm of one of her acquaintances, suddenly felt ill and, staggering, fell to the floor. There was a rush. Two men picked up the mask and carried her to the ladies' restroom, where she was placed on a couch. Having freed the lady from the constricted corset and removed all unnecessary clothing, they began to administer rubbing and spraying with water. But it was too late; her face was covered with a mortal pallor. Death was caused by a heart attack resulting from anemia of the whole body.
The third testimony belongs to the memoirist Galina von Meck, Tatiana Davydova's niece:
One day the brother of her companion [E. M. Molas], wishing to amuse Tatiana, suggested that she go with him to a masked ball. At that time such balls were very popular in Moscow and St. Petersburg in winter. After some hesitation, Tanya decided to go. There my aunt danced one or two dances. Then she slipped and fell. She had a heart attack. She was carried to one of the side rooms, but as soon as they got there, she was dead.
Some information about Elisabeth Molas is given in the memoirs of Galina von Meck: the companion was half Spanish and half German. Molas was born into a family of naval officers and was well acquainted with the Tchaikovskys. It was the Tchaikovsky brothers who recommended her to the Davydovs. Molas remained with Tatiana Davydova until her death.

Nadezhda von Meck wrote that Tatiana "died with a smile on her face". Pyotr Ilyich openly mentioned morphine as the cause of his niece's death in his letters: "She was cured there of morphinomania, but soon returned to the drug and finally poisoned herself with it", "for this unfortunate person the best and most desirable result was death, but nevertheless I was deeply shocked by the news ... her body had long been broken. It was a shadow of the old Tanya; the morphine had ruined her, and one way or another the tragic result was inevitable".
The family originally planned to hold the funeral in the Kiev Governorate (as Sokolov assumed, in Kamianka). But certain circumstances forced the parents to change their decision. Tatiana Davydova was buried in the cemetery of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra in St. Petersburg, in the "tent" of the Dukhovskaya Church, but the grave has not been preserved. Above the tomb in a marble frame was originally a copy of Murillo's Madonna, commissioned by the famous artist Jan Ciaglinski. The funeral cost 745 rubles, which were deposited in the church treasury by Nikolai Tchaikovsky.


Pyotr Tchaikovsky and Tatiana Davydova
The composer's biographer Valery Sokolov wrote about Tatyana Davydova's role in Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's life:
Tatyana's life at a certain stage became the object of Tchaikovsky's increased attention and many of his contradictory experiences. The painful scope of these experiences, along with his constant worries about his sister's poor health, proved to be the main "filling" of the emotional side of the composer's life during the Kamianka period, especially between 1880 and 1884. The niece was destined to become one of Pyotr Ilyich's deep emotional wounds and even "ulcers," the scars of which remained for a very long time.
Sokolov noted that Tatiana, as well as her brother Vladimir, were at the center of Tchaikovsky's attention from early childhood. Subsequently, Vladimir became the composer's true fan and "model". On the contrary, Tatyana was increasingly criticized by Tchaikovsky as time went on. Pyotr Ilyich was a direct witness of the formation of the girl's personality, and in his childhood years he took part in her upbringing, later he tried to take part in solving her "adult" problems. Tatiana was for a long time one of the most frequently mentioned "characters" in his correspondence.

Sokolov distinguished several areas of the composer's statements about his niece. One is Tchaikovsky's open admiration for Tatyana's talents, intelligence, kindness, and love for those close to her. The other is his equally sharp condemnation of the girl's laziness, selfishness, moral promiscuity, unscrupulousness, and, above all, her abuse of morphine, which caused irreversible changes in her psyche and physical state. A significant aspect of Tchaikovsky's thoughts and feelings on this matter was his assessment of the impact of Tatyana Davydova's fate on the condition of her mother, the composer's favorite sister. Valery Sokolov wrote that this theme was "monstrously heavy... for the composer himself — the constant observation (and even imagination) of her during the mentioned period (1880–1884) became a real 'bane' for his nervous system and mental state".
Until his first visit to Kamianka in 1865, the composer had only seen the girl in photographs sent to him by her parents and judged her growth based on stories from his relatives. Sokolov noted with irony that, at this time, his attention to the girl was limited to "kisses from my side to my kind niece". One of the photographs of the girl with her mother, "stolen," according to him, by Tchaikovsky from Alexei Davydov, was a constant object of the composer's attention. Sokolov assumed that Tchaikovsky's interactions with his niece during his visits to Kamianka included, in addition to games and walks, "piano lessons with four-handed playing".
As Tatiana Davydova grew older, she became closer to Modest Tchaikovsky and more distant from Pyotr Ilyich. Sokolov noted that a comparison of Tatiana's letters to the Tchaikovsky brothers reveals a fundamental difference in her attitude toward the addressees: "With the younger one, love was in the first place; with the older one, respect above all". At the same time, he quotes one of his niece's letters to the composer, which includes the fragment: "My dear, priceless one, love me a little, and I love you so, so, so firmly". The researcher considered the year 1878 a turning point, when "some features of her character and behavior... began to cause him irritation and rejection," although the composer still found her "pretty and clever" and noted her artistic abilities. In turn, Tatiana wrote long letters to Tchaikovsky, in one of them asking him to send his cycle of 12 pieces, Opus 40.
The composer's attitude towards Tatiana Davydova was contradictory. Periods of estrangement alternated with moments of closeness. In a letter to his younger brother, he wrote in 1879: "She has a wonderful heart, and all her faults, her roughness, her affectivity are felt and hated by herself, but she simply does not understand what must be done in order not to be like that". Tchaikovsky noted that the girl felt unhappy. He observed the changes in her appearance ("The children have improved after measles, although they are still thin and pale. Tanya was shaved but looks very pretty"), as well as her success in mastering foreign languages and the piano, and he admired her performances on the amateur stage. Tchaikovsky stated, "Gifted with great abilities, a wonderful heart, and remarkable beauty, [Tatiana] suffers from one rather obnoxious disadvantage—she is eternally and always bored. Her character is somehow broken, full of painful doubts and distrust of herself, restless, imbued with premature disappointment".
In June–August 1880, Tchaikovsky composed Six Vocal Duets (Op. 46), dedicated to Tatiana Davydova. Tchaikovsky's duets vary in style. Tears, In the Vegetable Garden Near the Ford, Passion Has Passed, and Dawn are filled with deep feeling and touch the listener with their lyricism. In contrast, Evening is a musical piece of an illustrative and descriptive character with declamatory turns, while Scottish Ballad is a dramatic dialogue. The work on the cycle began in Kamianka and continued at the estates of Nadezhda von Meck, in Brailov and Simaki. The cycle was first published by Pyotr Jurgenson in 1881. The autograph of the Six Vocal Duets is now in the Tchaikovsky House-Museum in Klin (f. 88, No. 129). Books from the composer's personal library have also survived, from which he studied the poems that formed the basis of the duets. Two duets from this cycle were later reworked for duet and orchestra: the duet Tears was arranged by Sergei Taneyev (this score has never been published and exists only in manuscript), and the duet Dawn was arranged by Pyotr Ilyich himself (this score has also not been published). Most of the duets are for soprano and mezzo-soprano, but one duet (No. 2) is for soprano and baritone.

American musicologist Roland John Wiley based on an analysis of the text of the poems underlying the duets, concluded as follows:In composing the cycle, Tchaikovsky alluded to the difficulties in the fate of Tatiana Davydova herself: night brings relief from the cares of the day (No. 1), inconsolable sadness (No. 3), the girl suffers from the arrogance of the young man (No. 4), love has passed, but a return to the serene past is no longer possible (No. 5), admiration for nature and prayer (No. 6). The only duet that does not fit into the overall scheme, in Wiley's view, is No. 2 (the father's blood on the son's hands). Wiley also noted that the composer himself pointed out that this particular duet should be recited rather than sung. The cycle clearly traces the sequence of the times of day to which the duets are dedicated — from Evening (No. 1) to Dawn (No. 6).The closeness between Pyotr Ilyich and Tatiana in 1881 is illustrated by a letter to him from his brother Anatoly, who wrote: "From her own words I know that you are almost the only person who can have an influence on her". The composer himself, however, noted, "If I were asked what is the worst torture in the world, I would say: to spend two evening hours in Tanya's company... within five minutes [she] will perform 100 senseless and aimless actions and utter 400 incoherent thoughts, scraps of thoughts, memories, or just some nonsense". He wrote with regret that he begins to be more angry at Tatiana than pity her, notes her "selfishness, heartlessness, weakness of character," resents that "a healthy girl, out of characterlessness, out of caprice, to spite herself and others voluntarily ruin themselves, like a drunkard, drinking inebriated". Tchaikovsky suggested that the sister's painful condition was caused by anxiety for Tatiana. The composer concluded, "My nerves are terribly shaken, and I will simply be forced to leave here [Kamianka] soon, at least for a while, so as not to fall ill myself". He saw only one way out in solving the problems of his niece — her marriage: "Only serious duties around her husband and children can excite in her the desire to take care of her health". Pyotr Ilyich organized the delivery of Tatiana Davydova in Paris and her drug treatment at the hospital of Charcot's assistant, Dr. N. Pascal. Charcot personally examined the patient. She was treated by reducing the dose of morphine and using opium.
The condition of the patient was grave: Tatiana "screamed, tore her hair, incessantly fainted, delirious, in a word, it was something so terrible that I do not know how I endured this impression", wrote the composer to Nadezhda von Meck. In response to a letter from Anatoly Tchaikovsky, who used the expression "your Tanya", the composer wrote in irritation that he was ready to help Tatiana and be useful to her, but flatly refused to consider her his own, noting that he had recently felt fear in relation to her. Tatiana's stay in the hospital, the payment of a maid, and a separate nurse forced Tchaikovsky to ask Nadezhda von Meck for additional financial assistance, and his publisher Pyotr Jurgenson for a loan of 2,000 rubles. Von Meck sent 5,000 rubles. Tchaikovsky was disappointed with the methods of treatment and wrote that, instead of morphine, Tatiana was simply becoming accustomed to other drugs. He explained her severe condition not as a result of addiction but as the "fatal properties of this girl", expressing a desire only to "be away" from Tatiana and making plans to leave the capital of France. Poznansky claimed that Pyotr Ilyich employed a special tactic in his dealings with Tatiana and other representatives of the Davydov family: he pretended not to notice anything, thereby trying not to aggravate the situation. The Davydovs, in turn, were aware of the composer's pretense and were grateful to him for it. To these problems was added the rapid deterioration of Tatiana's eyesight.

The composer took care of the paperwork, the baptism of the child born to Tatiana Davydova, as well as the issue of arranging for the child's feeding and upbringing. Dr. Ferre performed the Catholic rite of baptism. Tatiana's maid Sasha and the composer became godparents, with Tchaikovsky flatly refusing to call himself a Catholic. According to the composer, Ferre conducted the rite "unusually swaggeringly" and then "sat at Tanya's bedside, holding her hand and looking at her in love". The boy was given the name Georgy-Léon or Georgy. He was very much liked by the composer, who even made plans to adopt him for a while. Tchaikovsky arranged for the boy to be cared for by a nurse who lived outside Paris. Tchaikovsky wrote with dismay that the mother was not much impressed by the parting with her son; she also thought little of the trouble she had caused the family. However, the composer did not condemn his niece, drawing from his own experience of sin.The composer's treatment of Tatiana had become sharply negative by March 1885. In a letter to his brother Modest, he wrote: "I cannot see her without malice and disgust". In the summer of that year, Tchaikovsky planned to move Georgy to his homeland, but Tatiana opposed this, hinting at some change in her own destiny that would allow her to take over the boy's upbringing herself. Valery Sokolov believed she was referring to Nikolai Tchaikovsky's decision to adopt Georgy, which Tatiana had presumably already learned about. In August 1885, the composer's older brother and his wife traveled to Paris specifically to meet the boy. John Roland Wiley, however, wrote: "The circumstances of Georgy-Léon's adoption remain mysterious". In February, Tchaikovsky coordinated the financial matters connected with the adoption and allocated 500 rubles for it. In June, the plans were disrupted at Tatiana's initiative, who requested to keep the child in France for another year. Tchaikovsky prepared to suspend the adoption process already underway, but in August, his brother Nicholas arrived in Paris. Wiley assumed that the child's return to Russia the following June was against the mother's will.
Pyotr Ilyich's meetings with his niece became increasingly rare. The last of them took place in September 1886 in Moscow at the house of Anna von Meck and in October–November of the same year in St. Petersburg. He stated, "Tania has terribly lost weight, but is perfectly healthy". The composer took the news of her death hard: "This morning I received one sad piece of news (the unexpected death of my niece, a young beautiful girl), which has so shaken me that the pen is falling from my hands and that even about yesterday, which constitutes an epoch in my life, I find it difficult to speak. All my thoughts have gone to the place where the terrible misfortune occurred". Tchaikovsky, along with his Moscow relatives, attended the funeral service for Tatiana.
In early February, Tchaikovsky learned that a posthumous drawing of his niece had been made. He ordered a copy of it for himself. The portrait of the deceased was created by the artist Jan Cionglinski. A copy of it is now in Tchaikovsky's study in his House-Museum in Klin.


Georgy Nikolayevich Tchaikovsky

In France, Georgy was raised by the Auclair family in Villeneuve, south of Paris. He spent the first three years of his life there. Tchaikovsky visited him when he came to Paris, and grudgingly noted the boy's resemblance to his supposed father, Blumenfeld, although he felt sympathy for the child. Later, Tchaikovsky took an active part in his fate. In particular, in his will, the composer provided for the boy's material well-being.
Lydia Konisskaya claimed that Davydov senior did not know about the existence of her grandson for a long time. The secret was revealed by chance. Lev Davydov declared to Nikolai Tchaikovsky: "Oh, how I don't like this Frenchman of yours!", the composer's younger brother, Major General in the Admiralty, Hippolyte Tchaikovsky, who was present, carelessly replied: "How can you not love him, he is your grandson!" By this time Tatiana was long dead. Ippolit himself did not learn the secret of the boy's adoption at once. Pyotr Ilyich noted in one of his letters: "Hippolyte visited Nikolai Ilyich and several times noted with surprise that Zh[orzh] looked like Tanya, but did not suspect anything". In turn, John Roland Wiley wrote that thanks to Blumenfeld's boasting about his victory in the field of love, Tatiana Davydova's pregnancy was known all over Kiev, and Alexandra actively asked her brother about Blumenfeld, although she had never been interested in him before.
Galina von Meck, who knew Georgy well in his childhood and youth, claimed that Georgy knew that Tatiana was his real mother (the composer's English biographer Anthony Holden claimed that Tatiana Davydova visited him regularly after he was adopted by Tchaikovsky). Her portrait was always on her son's desk. He studied in Moscow and became a mining engineer. Georgy married a girl who was also illegitimate. They had a son. The family emigrated to Italy after the October Revolution.
Valery Sokolov described Georgi's fate differently: After World War I, Georgi and his wife Elena Vladimirovna (adopted daughter of Olga Mikhailovna Golovinskaya) emigrated to Yugoslavia. They originally lived in the town of Trebinje (now in Bosnia and Herzegovina near Dubrovnik, where they later moved). Georgy Tchaikovski was listed as a technician for the Ministry of Railways in Zemun, near Belgrade. He died in this town on February 16, 1940, and was buried in the New Cemetery in Belgrade.


Historiography

Valery Sokolov wrote that Tatyana Davydova's biography "can be traced through the composer's letters to various addressees." Her own letters to relatives, as well as her mother's letters to Pyotr and Modest Tchaikovsky regarding Tatiana's fate, have also survived. They contain descriptions of both the early and the most dramatic events of the girl's life. Some details of her life can be found in the correspondence of Nikolai and Anatoly Tchaikovsky. There are few of Tatiana's letters to Pyotr Ilyich — only for the years 1878–1881. The international site of researchers of Tchaikovsky's biography and work, Tchaykovsky Society, states that only two letters from Tchaikovsky to Tatiana Davydova, dated 1878 and 1881, have survived: Letter 937 of October 10, 1878, from St. Petersburg (which discusses the relationship between Tatiana and Anatoly Tchaikovsky, as well as the impact of the death of his brother on the mental state of Pyotr Ilyich's friend, Aleksey Apukhtin, and is in the National Library of Russia, f. 834, ed. xr. 18, л. 1-2), and Letter 1702 of March 4, 1881, from Naples (where Tchaikovsky talks about his stay in Italy and plans for the future, and which is in the National Library of Russia, f. 834, xr. 18, fol. 3-4). In the archives of the Tchaikovsky State House-Museum, there are 9 letters from Tatyana Davydova to the composer, dated 1878 and 1879.
Among memoirists, the most detailed accounts of Tatiana Davydova's fate are given by her close relatives — her younger brother Yuri Davydov in his book Notes on P. I. Tchaikovsky, published in 1962, and her niece Galina von Meck in her book As I Remember Them (1973). Yuri Davydov, in particular, delicately circumvents the problem of Tatiana's abuse of morphine. He explains the girl's health problems by stating that "from too rapid mental and physical development, she began to have severe headaches that tormented her all her life". The memoirist avoids describing the real difficulties in the relationship between the composer and his niece. According to Davydov, "Pyotr Ilyich admired his niece and loved his sister very much, but he could not establish their relationship, and he himself, in turn, became irritated and suffered". Tatiana's child, according to her brother, was born in Paris from an unnamed married Russian (a Catholic by religion), who could not divorce his wife in accordance with the laws of the Russian Empire. The adoption of Georgy, according to Davydov, was carried out by Nikolai Tchaikovsky "at the urgent request" of the composer. Yuri explains his sister's death as being due to a heart attack.
Only three times does Modest Tchaikovsky recall the fate of Tatiana Davydova in his three-volume book The Life of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (Based on Documents Kept in the Archive in Klin). Twice he mentions her death. Modest Tchaikovsky describes how he was awakened in Moscow by a telegram about Tatiana's death in the capital. He did not immediately wake up his older brother, who got up only "at the 11th hour contented, happy, and alert". The composer was grief-stricken by the unexpected news but "did not change his decision to conduct the Cherevichki two more times". He mentions Tatiana once in connection with the dedication of six duets to her, dating their creation from June 5 to July 10, 1880 (Dombaev, for example, dates them from June 4 to August 24 of the same year).
Soviet musicologists and biographers of Tchaikovsky preferred not to delve into the problems associated with Tatiana Davydova. Art historian Andrei Budyakovsky mentions Tatiana Davydova's name quite often in his book The Life of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, created at the turn of the 1930s and 1940s but published only in 2003. He summarizes the events of 1883 as follows: Tatiana refuses suitors "right and left," but falls in love with Blumenfeld. In Paris, she gives birth to a son, Georgy, and "Tchaikovsky, who saw a significant share of his guilt in the fact that he allowed his niece to do this, managed to hide what had happened from his parents". The composer took the child into his care, but this story "poisoned his fascination with his favorite city and ... had a detrimental effect on his mental health and his work".
Local historian Lydia Konisskaya, in her book Tchaikovsky in St. Petersburg (1969 and 1974 editions), limits herself with regard to Tatiana to an abridged retelling of Yuri Davydov's notes, but cites fragments from the composer's diary that testify to Pyotr Ilyich's sympathy for Georgy, Tatiana Davydova's son: "G. was charming in his balakhonchik. He was clever and patient. In the font he cried very much... Georgy was very pleased with the toys, especially the soldiers entering the fortress. Left secretly from him, avoiding tears". From entries in Tchaikovsky's diary and from his letter to his brother Modest, it is known that the child was baptized again, this time in an Orthodox church. Russian philologist Boris Anshakov, in his biographical essay The Tchaikovsky Brothers (1981), tells the story of Tatiana Davydova's childbirth in Paris and the adoption of her son in a chapter dedicated to his adoptive father, Nikolai Ilyich Tchaikovsky.
The emigrant writer and biographer Nina Berberova only mentions Tatiana Davydova in passing in her widely acclaimed essay Tchaikovsky. At the same time, in one sentence, she offers two interpretations of events, contradicting the widespread belief of researchers: "The grandson of N. F. von Meck, Adam Karlovich Benigsen, son of the eldest daughter of Nadezhda Filaretovna, who invited me to his house several times and talked to me — not about Tchaikovsky, whom he could not know, but about the von Meck family, about his uncle, who had squandered the von Meck millions, and about another who had married Tchaikovsky's niece, Anna Davydova, the sister of Tanya, whom P. I. I. loved so much and who secretly gave birth to an illegitimate son by Felix Blumenfeld, a famous pianist and conservatory professor of his time [according to all other researchers, the protagonist of the drama is another Blumenfeld, Stanislav], and soon committed suicide [no one else describes this version of events]".
Doctor of Art History and Professor at the National Pedagogical Drahomanov University in Kiev, Galina Poberezhnaya, in her biography of Tchaikovsky published in 1994, does not mention specific events in the life of Tatiana Davydova. However, discussing the images of strong women in the composer's works, she writes: "A bright trace in the memory and soul of the composer was left by his niece Tatiana Davydova — an outstanding, tragic personality. Female love, as the supreme embodiment of the idea of life and the inevitability of death, received in her fate a real, not conventional-theatrical, embodiment".
According to ballet critic Pavel Yashchenko, who undertook an analysis of Tchaikovsky's ballet The Nutcracker, the Davydovs' estate in Kamianka "was transformed in the composer's mind into a childish utopian realm of sweet Confiturenburg, where the owner of the estate, the composer's sister Alexandra Ilyinichna, was a magnanimous queen, her daughter Tatiana, who had died five years before her, was Clara, and his 'idol'... Bob 'prince-lover'". The very 'kingdom of Confiturenburg', where the main characters of The Nutcracker find themselves, is akin to some kind of narcotic vision, which, from his point of view, correlates with the Davydov family's fascination with morphine.
In 2021, Russian composer and music historian Valery Sokolov dedicated a large (110-page) article, "Tatiana Davydova in the Life of P. I. Tchaikovsky," to Tatiana Davydova in the collection of scientific publications St. Petersburg Musical Archive, which was dedicated to Tchaikovsky and published under the patronage of the Tchaikovsky Society. In this article, he reconstructed the girl's biography and attempted to determine the role of her problems in the composer's life and work. Sokolov distinguished two stages in Tatiana Davydova's life: the prosperous (until 1879) and the "dramatic" (1879–1887). Tatiana Davydova also became one of the main characters in the second volume of American historian Alexander Poznansky's book Pyotr Tchaikovsky: A Biography. The book published rare photographs of the girl. Tatiana Davydova occupies a significant place in the monographs of another American researcher, John Roland Wiley, as well as British musicologist David Brown.


Cultural representations
The episodic role of little Tatiana Davydova in the film The Music Lovers (1971) by British director Ken Russell was played by his daughter Victoria.
Tatiana Davydova was a supporting actress in the film Apocrypha: Music for Pyotr and Paul, directed by Russian director Adel Al-Hadad in 2004. The role of Tatiana was played by actress Alina Bulynko, in the movie she is much younger than her prototype. According to the plot, the composer, returning from Vienna in 1878, visited his sister Alexandra Davydova at her husband's estate in Kamianka. The first performance of the composer's new work Handsome Joseph was to take place in the local church. Households and villagers eagerly await the premiere, but the performance unexpectedly ends in failure. The screenwriter Yuri Arabov significantly changed a real episode from the composer's life (described in detail by the British researcher David Brown), which he himself told in a letter to Nadezhda von Meck. In fact, Good-looking Joseph is not the Tchaikovsky's work, but a troparion arranged by Bortnyansky, which the composer decided to perform as a regent. The work was not performed by a church choir, as in the film, but by an amateur family quartet composed of representatives of the Davydov and Tchaikovsky families, including Tatiana. For Pyotr Ilyich, the unsuccessful performance was not a tragedy. The event itself took place not in 1878, but on April 18, 1880.

Pyotr Tchaikovsky wrote about the events of the performance of Good-looking Joseph in a letter to Nadezhda von Meck dated April 18, 1880:Today I made my debut as a church regent. My sister wanted us to sing Good-looking Joseph when the shroud was taken out today. We got out the sheet music, formed a quartet of my sister, Tanya, Anatoly and me, and prepared this troparion arranged by Bortnyansky. The singing went well at home, but in church Tanya became confused, and after her all of us. Despite my vain efforts to restore order, I had to leave without finishing. Sister and Tanya were very upset by this incident, but on Sunday there would be a chance to make up for our shame at dinner. I undertook to learn with them the 7th Bortnyansky's Hier Cherubim and Our Father from my liturgy.David Brown suggested that these events were the occasion for Tchaikovsky's composition of the Six Duets (op. 46).


Notes


References


Bibliography


Sources
Давыдов, Ю. Л. (1962). П. И. Чайковский и семья Давыдовых // Записки о П. И. Чайковском (in Russian). М.: Государственное музыкальное издательство. pp. 3–43.
Чайковский, М. И. (1997a). Жизнь Петра Ильича Чайковского (по документам, хранившимся в архиве в Клину) в 3-х томах. Гений в искусстве (in Russian). Vol. V- 2. 1877—1884. М.: Алгоритм. p. 605. ISBN 5-88878-007-3
Чайковский, М. И. (1997b). Жизнь Петра Ильича Чайковского (по документам, хранившимся в архиве в Клину) в 3-х томах. Гений в искусстве (in Russian). Vol. V. 3. 1885—1893. М.: Алгоритм. p. 401. ISBN 5-88878-007-3
Чайковский, П. И. (2020). Завещание композитора // Музыкальное обозрение: Газета (in Russian). М.: Музыкальное обозрение. ISSN 2224-7025.
Чайковский, П. И. (1966). Письмо Татьяне Давыдовой (4 марта 1881 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. Х: Письма (1881). М.: Музыка. pp. 58–59.
Чайковский, П. И. (1965a). Письмо Анатолию Чайковскому (7 сентября 1880 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. IХ: Письма (1880). М.: Музыка. pp. 260–261.
Чайковский, П. И. (1965b). Письмо к Надежде фон Мекк от 18 апреля 1880 года // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. IX: Письма (1880). М.: Музыка. pp. 109–110.
Чайковский, П. И. (1962). Письмо Татьяне Давыдовой (10 октября 1878 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. VII: Письма (1878). М.: Музыка. pp. 422–423.
Чайковский, П. И. (1959a). Письмо Александре Давыдовой (23 октября 1861 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. V: Письма (1848—1875). М.: Музыка. pp. 69–71.
Чайковский, П. И. (1959b). Письмо Александре Давыдовой (4 декабря 1861 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. V: Письма (1848—1875). М.: Музыка. pp. 71–72.
Чайковский, П. И. (1959c). Письмо Александре Давыдовой (10 сентября 1862 года) // Полное собрание сочинений. Литературные произведения и переписка (in Russian). Vol. V. Письма (1848—1875). М.: Музыка. pp. 73–75.
Meck, G. von (1973). The Mecks // As I Remember Them. London.: Dobson Books Ltd. pp. 29–42. ISBN 0-2347-7454-1


Researches and fiction
Аншаков, Б. Я. (1981). Николай Ильич // Братья Чайковские. Очерк (in Russian). Ижевск.: «Удмуртия». pp. 12–22.
Берберова, Н. Н. (1997). Чайковский (in Russian). М.: Лимбус Пресс. p. 256. ISBN 978-5-8538-8003-0.
Будяковский, А. Е. (2003). Жизнь Петра Ильича Чайковского (in Russian). СПб.: КультИнформПресс. p. 351. ISBN 5-8392-0229-0
Конисская, Л. М. (1974). "Чтоб музыка моя распространялась" // Чайковский в Петербурге. 2-е изд., переработанное и дополненное (in Russian). Л.: Лениздат. pp. 188–223.
Побережная, Г. И. (1994). Изобразительный элемент в музыке П. И. Чайковского // Пётр Ильич Чайковский (in Russian). Киев: Рос. мовою. pp. 102–129. ISBN 5-8238-0156-4
Познанский, А. Н. (2009a). Пётр Чайковский. Биография. В 2-х томах. Жизнеописания (in Russian). Vol. 2. СПб.: Вита Нова. p. 624.
Познанский, А. Н. (2009b). Пётр Чайковский. Биография. В 2-х томах. Жизнеописания (in Russian). Vol. 1. СПб.: Вита Нова. p. 608. ISBN 978-5-9389-8229-1.
Познанский, А. Н. (2011). Чайковский в Петербурге (in Russian). СПб.: Композитор. p. 544. ISBN 978-5-7379-0445-6.
Соколов, В. С. (1994). Антонина Чайковская. История забытой жизни (in Russian). М.: Музыка. p. 296. ISBN 978-5-7140-0565-7. ISBN 5-7140-0565-1
Соколов, В. С. (2021). Татьяна Давыдова в жизни П. И. Чайковского // Петербургский музыкальный архив. Чайковский: сборник статей / сост. и отв. ред. Т. 3. Сквирская (in Russian). Vol. 15. СПб.: Композитор. pp. 206–317. ISBN 978-5-7379-0965-9.
Ященков, П. (2014). Балет со следами морфия и неразделённой любви к племяннику. Часть 3 // Московский комсомолец: Газета (in Russian).
Brown, D. (2009). Tchaikovsky. The Man and his Music. New York: Pegasus Books. p. 512. ISBN 978-1605-9801-71.
Holden, A. (1995). Tchaikovsky. London; New York.: Bantam Press. p. 489. ISBN 9-780-5930-2468-3.
Lanza, J. (2007). The Music Lovers // Phallic Frenzy: Ken Russell and His Films. Chicago.: Chicago Review Press. p. 363. ISBN 9-781-5697-6482-4.
Orlova, A. A. (1990). Tchaikovsky. A self-portrait. Translated by R. M. Davison with a Foreword by David Brown. 1st edition. Oxford, New York.: Oxford University Press. p. 436. ISBN 978-0-1931-5319-6.
Wiley, R. J. (2009). Tchaikovsky. The Master Musicians. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 592. ISBN 978-0195-3689-25.
Warrack, J. H. (1973). Country Life: 1885—1887 // Tchaikovsky. New York.: C. Scribner's Sons. pp. 189–208. ISBN 978-0-684-13558-8.


Manuals
Домбаев, Г. С. (1958). Вокальная музыка для двух голосов с фортепиано // Творчество Петра Ильича Чайковского в материалах и документах (in Russian). М.: Государственное музыкальное издательство. pp. 288–291.

Shahi Tegin, Tegin Shah or Sri Shahi (ruled 680–739 CE, known to the Chinese as 烏散特勤灑 Wusan Teqin Sa "Tegin Shah of Khorasan") was a king of the Turk Shahis, a dynasty of Western Turk or mixed Western Turk-Hephthalite origin who ruled from Kabul and Kapisa to Gandhara in the 7th to 9th centuries.


Context
Kabulistan was the heartland of the Turk Shahi domain, which at times included Zabulistan and Gandhara.
During their rule, the Turk Shahi were in constant conflict against the eastward expansion of the Umayyad Caliphate. About 650 CE, the Arabs captured Sistan, and started to attack Shahi territory from the west. They captured Kabul in 665 CE, but the Turk Shahis were able to mount a counter-offensive and repulsed the Arabs, taking back the areas of Kabul and Zabulistan (around Ghazni), as well as the region of Arachosia as far as Kandahar.


Rule
In 680 CE, Shahi Tegin succeeded Barha Tegin.  The Arabs again failed to capture Kabul and Zabulistan in 697–698 CE, and their general Yazid ibn Ziyad was killed in the action.
In 719/20 CE, the Tegin of Kabulistan (Tegin Shah) and the Iltäbär of Zabulistan sent a combined embassy to the Chinese emperor of the Tang dynasty in Xi'an to obtain confirmation of their thrones. The Chinese emperor signed an investiture decree, which was returned to the Turk rulers:

In the seventh year of the Kaiyuan reign [719 CE], [Jibin dispatched] envoys to the [Tang] court, who offered up a book of an astrological text, secret medical recipes, together with foreign medecines and other things. An imperial edict was issued to bestow on the king [of Jibin] the title Geluodazhi Tele [for "Tegin"].
The word "Geluodazhi" in this extract (Chinese: 葛罗达支, pronounced in Early Middle Chinese: kat-la-dat-tcǐe), is thought to be a transliteration of the ethnonym Khalaj. Hence Tegin Shah was "Tegin of the Khalaj". This title also appears on his coinage in Gupta script, where he is named "hitivira kharalāča", probably meaning "Iltäbär of the Khalaj". In 720 CE, the ruler of Zabulistan (謝䫻, xieyu) also received the title Gedaluozhi Xielifa (Chinese: 葛達羅支頡利發), Xielifa being the known Chinese transcription of the Turkish "Iltäbär", hence "Iltäbär of the Khalaj". Overall, it seems that the Turk Shahi rulers were Khalaj Turks.
Tegin Shah abdicated in 739 CE in favour of his son Fromo Kesaro and sent an embassy through Central Asia in 719 CE:

In the 27th year [of Kaiyuan, ie 739 CE], the king Wusan Tela Sa [for Khorasan Tegin Shah] submitted a memorial requesting that due to his old age, his son Fulin Jisuo may succeed him on the throne. The emperor agreed and dispatched an envoy in order to confer the king's title on him through an imperial edict.


References


Notes


Sources
Martin, Dan (2011). "Greek and Islamic Medicines' Historical Contact with Tibet". In Akasoy, Anna; Burnett, Charles; Yoeli-Tlalim, Ronit (eds.). Islam and Tibet: Interactions Along the Musk Routes. Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing. pp. 117–144. ISBN 978-0-7546-6956-2.
Kuwayama, Shōshin (桑山正進) (1993). "6-8 世紀 Kapisi-Kabul-Zabul の貨幣と發行者" (PDF). 東方學報 (in Japanese). 65: 371–430.

234 people were killed and 1200 wounded from 127 Afghan-inspired attacks in Pakistan in 1987. Overall, the country was the target of half of the state-sponsored attacks worldwide. Below is the timeline of a few main attacks.

July 14 — 1987 Karachi car bombing
75 people were killed and more than 300 injured in two car bomb explosions and two other small bombs in Karachi's Saddar market. President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq alluded to Afghan agents behind the bombings and sought international support to fight terror. He also said that the bombings were aimed at Pakistan to change its Afghan policy vis-à-vis Soviet intervention. Later, on September 19, 1987, Interior Minister Raja Nadir Pervez said that 60 Afghans were arrested from North Western Frontier Province in connection with the bombings and they were sent by Afghan secret police for subversive activities.

September 16 — 12 people were killed and 33 injured by a car bomb in Peshawar.
September 20 — At least 5 people were killed and 16 injured when a bomb exploded in a bus station in Rawalpindi. Prime Minister Mohammad Khan Junejo who was on a visit to the United Nations in New York told the reporters that this would not dampen the spirit of the people of Pakistan but raise it. This was the fourth blast in 10 days.


References

Unitas: the Catholic League for the Unity of Christians is an organisation founded in the Church of England and dedicated to the full visible reconciliation of Anglicans and Roman Catholics as one Church. It is associated with the Anglo-Papalist wing of Anglo-Catholicism, from which its founders were drawn. Today, and especially since the formation of personal ordinariates, the League is ecumenical in membership.


History
The League was founded in 1913 with 97 foundation members on the initiative of Richard Langford-James and Henry Fynes-Clinton. Its predecessors were the Association for the Promotion of the Unity of Christendom (established 1857) and the Guild of the Love of God (founded 1911). According to the League, "It was founded by Anglicans who believed passionately that the future of their Church lay in the reunion of all Christians in a common Catholic and Apostolic faith in restored full communion with the Successor of Peter in the see of Rome."


Activities
A member of the Catholic Societies of the Church of England, the League supports the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity (formerly the Octave of Christian Unity), the work of the International Anglican-Roman Catholic Commission on Unity and Mission, and in the past, its predecessor, the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission. Associated with the Catholic League is the Sodality of the Precious Blood, a confraternity of male priests in the Church of England who pray the Liturgy of the Hours and practice celibacy.


Bibliography
Manual of the Catholic League (1932)
L.G. Fisher, The Creed of the Council of Trent with Explanations (1954)


See also
Anglican–Roman Catholic dialogue
Catholic societies of the Church of England
Liberal Anglo-Catholicism


Further reading
Brian Doolan, The First Fifty Years: A History of the Catholic League, from 1913-1966 (Printed for the League by Crux Press).
Michael Walsh, Look to the Rock: The Catholic League and the Anglican Papalist Quest for Reunion (Canterbury Press Norwich, 2019) ISBN 9781786220585
Michael Yelton, Anglican Papalism: An Illustrated History (Canterbury Press Norwich, 2005) ISBN 9781853116551


External links
Official website


References

"The Dark of the Matinée" (known as "Matinée" on single versions) is a song by Scottish indie rock band Franz Ferdinand. It was released as the third single from their eponymous debut studio album on 19 April 2004. The song reached number eight on the UK Singles Chart. In Australia, the song was ranked number 50 on Triple J's Hottest 100 of 2004.


Background
The song is about walking home from Bearsden Academy fantasising about a better life in the future, telling Terry Wogan about it on UK national television, then being shaken from the fantasy as its own ridiculousness shatters its very existence. The chorus and title were inspired by bassist Bob Hardy remarking that the dark of a matinée performance was a utopian environment to play in.


Music video
The video features the band dressed as schoolboys, dancing in an automatic, almost possessed, fashion and miming along to the main vocal track. It was inspired by Dennis Potter's television play Blue Remembered Hills (1979), which features adults playing children, and the lip-sync device Potter used in his 'serials with songs' Pennies from Heaven (1978) and The Singing Detective (1986). Another part of the video shows the band dressed in white clothing and standing in front of a large photograph of Terry Wogan (who is namechecked in the song).


Track listings


Charts


References

The Entity (Spanish: La Entidad) is a 2015 Peruvian 3D supernatural horror film directed by Eduardo Schuldt from a screenplay written by Sandro Ventura. It premiered on 22 January 2015 in Peruvian theaters, and had its film festival debut on 28 August 2015 at Film4 FrightFest. The Entity has been billed as Peru's first 3D horror film and to have been loosely based on true stories.


Synopsis
Needing a good final project for college, a group of media students have chosen to film a documentary researching reaction videos. They're surprised when they find a video featuring someone they know, especially when they discover that anyone who has watched the original video (not the reaction video) has died after they finish watching. Intrigued, the students focus their research, which requires that they visit the deep web, and they find that the original video is tied to an ancient and deadly curse.


Cast
Rodrigo Falla as Joshua
Daniella Mendoza as Carla
Carlos Casella as Lucas
Mario Gaviria as Benjamín
Analú Polanco as Isabel


Reception
Prior to its release The Entity received comparisons to similarly themed films such as Paranormal Activity, The Blair Witch Project, and Ring. Review websites Flickering Myth and Nerdly commented upon these comparisons, as both felt that The Entity suffered from being too overly familiar to pre-existing works. Twitch Film was more positive, writing "Seasoned horror fans will find nothing new here, being able to guess most of the plot beats; but then again, Peruvian directors are just starting to try their hand at a genre which has been around for a long while. As more of them attempt to scare audiences, they'll hopefully improve on what came before. With its effective creepy atmosphere and solid use of an often-maligned gimmick, La Entidad is a good step in the right direction."


References


External links
Official website
The Entity at IMDb
The Entity at Rotten Tomatoes

"The Flood" is a song performed by the Georgian-born, British singer Katie Melua and the lead single from her 4th studio album The House. It was released on 17 May 2010 by Digital download and by CD on 24 May 2010.


Music video
The music video was directed by Kevin Godley, who has also directed videos for Eric Clapton and U2, as well as having directed the video for Melua's "Nine Million Bicycles". It features Melua performing the song playing the piano on a spinning platform surrounded by male dancers.


Critical reception
Nick Levine of Digital Spy gave the song a favorable review, stating, "there's no doubting her sincerity."  He felt the song was both positive and interesting, with a blend of styles and tempos that he described as "supremely elegant and subtly adventurous".


Track listing
Digital download

CD single


Chart performance
"The Flood" debuted on the UK singles chart on 23 May 2010 at its peak of No. 35.


Release history


References

The Foundation of Criminal Excellence (Latvian: Kriminālās ekselences fonds) is a Latvian crime comedy film released in 2018 directed by Oskars Rupenheits. Produced independently and partially financed through crowdfunding, the film was released in Latvian cinemas on 2 February 2018 and achieved significant domestic box office success. The film was nominated for Best Feature Film at the Latvian National Film Awards, Lielais Kristaps, and won the Delfi Audience Award and attracted media attention for its humorous portrayal of Latvian criminal culture.


Plot
Imants Veide, a struggling television scriptwriter, attempts to develop a crime series based on authentic criminal methods. To increase the realism of his screenplay, he begins researching Latvia’s criminal underworld. Initially observing from a distance, Imants gradually becomes directly involved in illegal activities, including organizing and participating in improvised criminal schemes.
Over time, he forms connections with small-time criminals, and the group’s schemes increase in scale and complexity. Misunderstandings, internal conflicts, and growing police attention escalate as Imants becomes more involved, prioritizing his television project despite the legal risks.
The criminal enterprise ultimately collapses following police intervention, and Imants is confronted with the consequences of his actions.


Cast
Lauris Kļaviņš as Imants Veide
Andris Daugaviņš as Harijs Kuharjonoks
Māris Mičerevskis as Duļķis
Armands Brakmanis as Aļģe
Juris Riekstiņš as Vintāžs
Jana Rubīna as the Neighbour
Jānis Plaudis as Inkognito
Rūdolfs Putāns as the TV Producer
Sintija Andersone as the Intern
Raimonds Platacis as the TV Director
Jānis Asaris as the TV Chief
Miks Kalējs as the TV Project Manager
Didzis Kalējs as TV Art Director
Andris Bekmanis as the TV Lawyer
Māris Brokāns as Inkognito’s Right-Hand Man
Ivars Krauklis as the Bartender
Aivars Šterns as the Security Guard
Edmonds Labanovskis as Zutis
Harijs Sils as the Surgeon
Santa Leiškalne as the Imaginary Girl
Ojārs Daugavietis as the Imaginary Boy
Oskars Zvejs as the Maniac Neighbour
Edmunds Aizkalns as the Investigator
Jānis Ielejs as the Junior Postal Worker
Rūdis and Ozijs as Pupsiks


Production
The film was produced independently and did not receive state funding. Financing was partially secured through crowdfunding initiatives. Director Oskars Rupenheits and the creative team adopted a low-budget production model, working with a cast that included mostly non-professional actors. The film’s independent production model was noted in Latvian media coverage.


Release
Kriminālās ekselences fonds premiered in Latvian cinemas on 2 February 2018. Prior to release, it was promoted through teaser materials and media coverage.
Within three weeks of its premiere, the film attracted more than 30,000 viewers. It later became the most-watched Latvian film in the history of the cinema Kino Citadele.


Reception
The film received extensive coverage in Latvian media, including discussions of its independent production model and unconventional casting. According to reporting by the National Film Centre of Latvia, audience reactions were compiled and published following its release, including comments from public figures such as Toms Grēviņš, Artis Volfs, Intars Rešetins, Ieva Adamss, Shipsea, Dita Rietuma, Renārs Zeltiņš, and Marta Kukarāne.
Several lines from the film gained popularity and were widely quoted in Latvian popular culture following its release.


Awards and nominations
The Foundation of Criminal Excellence was nominated for Best Feature Film at the 2018 Latvian National Film Awards, Lielais Kristaps. The film also won the Delfi Audience Award, reflecting its popularity with audiences.


Related projects
Members of the creative team later collaborated on additional Latvian film projects, including Tumšzilais Evaņģēlijs.


References


External links

The Foundation of Criminal Excellence at IMDb

The Story of Sin (Polish: Dzieje grzechu) is a 1975 Polish drama film directed by Walerian Borowczyk based on the novel Dzieje grzechu by Stefan Żeromski. It was entered into the 1975 Cannes Film Festival.


Cast
Grażyna Długołęcka as Ewa Pobratynska
Jerzy Zelnik as Lukasz Niepolomski
Olgierd Łukaszewicz as Count Zygmunt Szczerbic
Roman Wilhelmi as Antoni Pochron
Marek Walczewski as Plaza-Splawski
Karolina Lubieńska as Mrs. Pobratynska, Ewa's mother
Zdzisław Mrożewski as Mr. Pobratynski, Ewa's father
Mieczysław Voit as Count Cyprian Bodzanta
Marek Bargiełowski as Adolf Horst
Jolanta Szemberg as Aniela
Zbigniew Zapasiewicz as Priest Jutkiewicz
Władysław Hańcza as Dr. Wielgosinski
Jadwiga Chojnacka as Leoska, servant
Bogusław Sochnacki
Janusz Zakrzeński as Editor of 'Tygodnik Naukowy'


References


External links
The Story of Sin at IMDb

The Syed Family Xmas Eve Game Night is a 2021 short comedy film, directed by Fawzia Mirza. The film is written by and stars Kausar Mohammed as Noor, a queer Muslim woman who brings her Puerto Rican partner Luz (Vico Ortiz) home to a family gathering for the first time.
The cast also includes Meera Rohit Kumbhani, Pia Shah and D'Lo.
The film was written by Mohammed, partially based on her own life. It premiered at the 2021 Toronto International Film Festival.
The film was named to TIFF's annual year-end Canada's Top Ten list for 2021.


References


External links
The Syed Family Xmas Eve Game Night at IMDb

The Tijuana Story is a 1957 American film noir crime film directed by László Kardos (credited as Leslie Kardos). It stars Rodolfo Acosta as Manuel Acosta Mesa, a Mexican journalist who confronts a powerful crime syndicate in Tijuana. The film draws inspiration from the true story of Manuel Acosta Meza, a Tijuana journalist assassinated in 1956 for his efforts to expose organized crime and corruption.


Plot
In April 1956, schoolteacher Alberto Rodriguez arrives at the office of the El Sol newspaper in Tijuana, Mexico, seeking help from its editor, Manuel Acosta Mesa. Alberto has been severely beaten by members of a local crime syndicate after reporting that one of their operatives, Miguel Fuentes, was selling drugs near a school. After collapsing and being rushed to the hospital, Alberto's plight drives Manuel to confront Peron Diaz, a notorious crime boss operating out of a nightclub managed by an American, Eddie March. During the confrontation, Manuel demands that Peron cover Alberto's medical expenses but is instead attacked by Peron's enforcers. Eddie, grappling with his conscience, helps Manuel escape.
Peron tries to neutralize Manuel's anti-crime campaign by offering a lucrative advertising deal to Reuben Galindo, the owner of El Sol, on the condition that Manuel tones down his editorials. When Galindo informs Peron that Manuel's contract grants him full editorial control, Peron resorts to threatening Galindo's family. Meanwhile, a group of American teenagers visits Tijuana seeking adventure. One of them, Mitch, makes an inappropriate advance toward Linda Alvarez, Manuel's secretary, but she firmly rebuffs him. Later, Mitch encounters a bar girl at Eddie's nightclub, who persuades him to buy marijuana. Angered by the drug trade happening at his club, Eddie objects to Peron's men, but they dismiss his concerns.
Struggling with his involvement in Peron's operations, Eddie confides in his pregnant wife, Liz, that he feels trapped by financial dependency on the syndicate. Simultaneously, Galindo, worried about his family's safety, asks Manuel to soften his criticism of the syndicate. Manuel temporarily complies, but after Alberto dies from his injuries, he renews his efforts to expose Peron. Mitch, now remorseful, returns to Tijuana to apologize to Linda, and the two begin a relationship. However, when police find marijuana residue in Mitch's car, they attempt to arrest him. Panicking, Mitch flees and drowns. Deeply affected by Mitch's death, Manuel vows to take down Peron.
Using funds from buying out his contract at El Sol, Manuel launches a new reform-focused newspaper, El Imparcial, with his son Enrique as co-editor. Despite intimidation tactics from the syndicate, Manuel gains support from California newspapers. Fearing wider exposure, a crime syndicate in California orders Peron to kill Manuel. Peron enlists Miguel, who is imprisoned for drug offenses, to carry out the assassination. Miguel is temporarily released from jail through a bribe, but his drug cravings lead him to Eddie's club. There, Eddie discovers the plot and alerts the police, who apprehend Miguel before he can harm Manuel.
Peron's men, realizing Eddie has betrayed them, pursue him and Liz. After being forced off the road, Eddie fights back while Liz retrieves a gun and scares the attackers away. Determined to expose the syndicate, Eddie resolves to testify. However, before Manuel can present evidence at a legislative hearing, he is killed outside his home. At his funeral, Galindo rallies the community to stand against the syndicate, while Enrique continues his father's mission through El Imparcial.


Cast
Rodolfo Acosta as Manuel Acosta Mesa
James Darren as Mitch
Robert McQueeney as Eddie March
Jean Willes as Liz March
Joy Stoner as Linda
Paul Newlan as Peron Diaz
George E. Stone as Pino
Michael Fox as Reuben Galindo
Robert Blake as Enrique Acosta Mesa
William Fawcett as Alberto Rodriguez
Paul Coates as himself - the Narrator


History
The film is based on the life and death of Manuel Acosta Meza, editor of El Imparcial, who was known for his investigative reporting on organized crime in Tijuana. On July 26, 1956, Acosta Meza was murdered at his home, a crime attributed to his fearless exposés on the criminal syndicates in the city. The following year, Manuel Duenas was sentenced to six years in prison for his involvement, though other suspected individuals were not identified or prosecuted publicly.
Journalist Paul Coates narrated the film, as he had broken the original story on Acosta Meza's death. The production was shot on location in Mexico to capture the original atmosphere of Tijuana.
A bust of Acosta Meza now stands in Tijuana, near a local monument to freedom of speech, honoring his commitment to exposing corruption. The film, though produced with modest resources, continues to serve as a cinematic reflection on press freedom and the dangers faced by journalists.


See also
List of American films of 1957


References


External links
The Tijuana Story at IMDb
The Tijuana Story at the TCM Movie Database (archived)
Review of film at Variety

Theresa Kang is an American businesswoman. She is the CEO of Blue Marble Pictures and Blue Marble Productions, based in Los Angeles.


Early life and education
Kang is of Korean descent. She went to UCLA, where she minored in sociology.


Career
Kang started in the mailroom and then became an assistant at Endeavor in 2003. Over the course of her tenure, she worked in the television and motion picture departments, as assistant various points to Endeavor partners Ari Emmanuel, Ari Greenburg, Christopher Donnelly, and Paul Haas. In 2007, Kang was promoted to agent in the television literary department at Endeavor.
At WME, Kang was one of the first Asian American women to be promoted to partner in 2014. In 2012, Kang was one of The Hollywood Reporter Next Generation List as an agent and in 2021, The Hollywood Reporter's Annual(ish) Women in Entertainment Power 100. In addition to representing talent, Kang developed the internal initiative Empower with WME colleague Phil Sun, designed to mentor assistants within WME.
In 2019, Kang was one of three business people selected by Mayor Eric Garcetti to be in the Los Angeles Entrepreneurs in Residence for the Evolve Entertainment Fund, whose mission is to increase diversity focused  initiatives in the entertainment industryi. That same year, Kang was also named in the annual 100 Most Influential Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders in American Culture by Gold House.
After 17 years as an agent, Kang told KCRW that she asked herself if she was doing what she needed to do. She realized she wanted to tell stories, but not as an agent anymore, but be involved in the creative process. Kang left WME to launch Blue Marble Pictures in 2020. The name of the company was inspired by a photo of earth taken by the crew of Apollo 17 in the 1970s.
Her first project was as executive producer of the series, Pachinko. She had read the novel when she was an agent in 2017, and wanted to turn it into a series, sending it to several Asian American screenwriters who passed. She sent it to Soo Hugh, who was her client, who signed on. Kang told Glamour Magazine , "Our series was adapted by a Korean American woman, from a novel by a Korean American author. Of the 637 cast members, approximately 95% are Asian. That feels staggering to say." They won a Peabody Award and an Independent Spirit Award for Best Ensemble.


Personal
Kang also uses Theresa Kang-Lowe.
Kang is an advocate for under represented voices and diversity in Hollywood. She is a member of Korean American Leaders in Hollywood.


References

Theresa Anne Luke (born February 20, 1967, in Vancouver, British Columbia) is a retired Canadian rower. She rowed in the Women's eights in the 1996 and 2000 Summer Olympics. She won silver and bronze, respectively. After she retired, she became a teacher in Victoria, BC.


References


External links
Theresa Luke at World Rowing
Theresa Luke at Team Canada
Theresa Luke at Olympics.com
Theresa Luke at Olympedia

"This World Is Watching Me" is a song by Dutch disc jockey and producer Armin van Buuren and production band Rank 1. It features English band Kush composed of guitarist Sascha Collision and singer Zoe Durrant. The song was released in the Netherlands by Armind on 22 January 2007 as the third single from van Buuren's compilation 10 Years.
It the first collaboration of van Buuren with Rank 1's member Benno de Goeij who has become the permanent co-producer of his tracks.


Background and release
"This World Is Watching Me" was released as a collaboration between Armin van Buuren and Dutch trance duo Rank 1, featuring vocals by English act Kush. Apple Music lists a two-track digital single dated 22 January 2007 and issued by Armada Music, containing the original mix and the Cosmic Gate remix. A three-track EP edition, titled This World Is Watching Me (Featuring Kush), was released on 5 March 2007 and included the radio edit, original mix and Cosmic Gate remix. Van Buuren's official website lists the single as an Armind release dated 4 March 2007.


Music video
A music video to accompany the release of "This World Is Watching Me was first released onto YouTube on 2 November 2007. It features a walking girl wearing a heart outfit. It was shot in Iceland. It also contains extracts from Armin Only 2006 concert in Rotterdam Ahoy.


Legacy
In a 2017 feature on vocal trance, Matt "MyStro" Schaitel of EDM Identity included "This World Is Watching Me" as an example of 2000s vocal trance, highlighting the collaboration between van Buuren and Rank 1 and Kush's use of both chopped vocals and lyrical vocal parts. The song was later included on A State of Trance 1000 – Celebration Mix, a 2021 mix compiled from tracks voted for by the A State of Trance community.


Track listing
Netherlands – Armind – 12" & Digital download (ARMD1035)
"This World Is Watching Me" (Original Mix) – 7:58
"This World Is Watching Me" (Cosmic Gate Remix) – 8:36
Netherlands - Armada - CD Single (ARMA081)
"This World Is Watching Me" (Radio Edit) - 3:25
"This World Is Watching Me" (Cosmic Gate Remix) - 8:36
United States – Ultra – Digital download (UL1530)
"This World Is Watching Me" (Radio Edit) - 3:25
"This World Is Watching Me" (Original Mix) – 7:58
"This World Is Watching Me" (Cosmic Gate Remix) – 8:37


Charts


References

Thomas William Pearce (1855–1938) was an English missionary of the London Missionary Society in China.
Pearce arrived at Canton in 1879, and was connected with missionary work there until 1893, when was transferred to Hong Kong. He received an O.B.E. for his services as one of a committee of five responsible for the revision of the Chinese Bible. He was also one of the first to receive the degree of L.L.D. from Hong King University. He died at Withycombe, Exmouth, in 1938, aged 83.


References

Timothy Bowman Jr. (born May 26, 1987) is an American gospel musician. He started his music career in 2012 with the release of Beautiful by Trippin 'N' Rhythm Records. This album was his breakthrough release upon the Billboard magazine Gospel Albums and Independent Albums charts. The song "He Will", featuring Vickie Winans, his paternal aunt, charted on the Billboard magazine Hot Gospel Songs chart. He is a Grammy, Dove, and Stellar Award nominated artist. His critically acclaimed album "Listen" debuted at No. 1 on Billboard Gospel Albums, and garnered 2 No. 1 singles off the project "I’m Good" and "Fix Me”


Early life
Bowman was born on May 26, 1987, in the City of Detroit, Michigan. His father is noted smooth jazz guitarist Tim Bowman, and his aunt is gospel recording artist Vickie Winans. He majored in pharmaceutical sciences while going to Wayne State University.


Music career
His music recording career commenced in 2012 with the album Beautiful, released by Trippin 'N' Rhythm Records. This album was his breakthrough release upon the Billboard magazine charts, which placed it at No. 8 on the Gospel Albums and No. 50 on the Independent Albums charts. The song "He Will", featuring aunt Vickie Winans, placed a No. 19 on the Billboard magazine Hot Gospel Albums chart.


Personal life
Bowman Jr. proposed to his girlfriend, Brelyn Freeman, on December 25, 2014, while his family was celebrating Christmas in Michigan. The couple married on October 10, 2015 in Upper Marlboro, Maryland. On Sunday, August 19, 2018, he and his wife were ordained as the Music Pastor and Millennial Pastor at the Spirit of Faith Christian Center under Apostle Mike and Dr. DeeDee Freeman.  Bowman Jr started a tradition in 2019; every February he & Faith Music and a guest gospel singer sing tributes to different black gospel artists every week in February for Black History Month.


Discography


Singles


References


External links
Official website

The Tivoli Nature Preserve, also Tivoli Park, in Albany is the largest urban nature preserve in the Capital District.


History
The land now comprising the Tivoli Preserve was originally owned by the Van Rensselaer family as part of the patroonship of Rensselaerswyck. In 1844 the Tivoli Hollow Railroad was built from Fuller Road to the Albany Lumber District through the Tivoli Hollow and the northern end of the future park. In 1850 the city of Albany purchased the land in order to dam the Patroon Creek to form a reservoir for the public water system. In 1851 dams were constructed across Patroon Creek forming Upper and Lower Tivoli lakes, the upper lake was for storing and the lower for distribution. The lakes served the population of the city east of North Pearl Street.
Plans to extend Manning Boulevard from its then current terminus at the intersection of Clinton Avenue and Central Avenue through the waterworks property were proposed in the 1870s and though grading and preliminary work proceeded, the street laid out was never a grand boulevard as proposed and the portion inside the park was never completed. Due to neglect after being abandoned as a water source around the turn of the 20th century, the park became the site of an informal dumping ground in the 1920s and the lake became heavily polluted to the point where it allegedly was red with pollution from nearby slaughterhouses. In 1957 the city turned the waterworks property into the Tivoli Lakes Nature Study Sanctuary, though by 1974 the area was in such neglect again that the Albany Times Union published a faux obituary describing the park's "death". As part of a 1998 settlement closing the waste incinerator in the Sheridan Hollow neighborhood, the state funded a clean-up and upgrade of the preserve into an educational center in conjunction with the neighboring Philip Livingston Middle School.
Proposed in 2002 the Patroon Path will be a 10-foot (3.0 m) wide path from the Corning Preserve at the Hudson River west through the preserve along the Patroon Creek and Interstate 90 (I-90) to Rensselaer Lake and the Pine Bush Preserve.


Activities
Fish in Tivoli Lake include bluegill, large mouth bass, and pumpkinseed; birds in the preserve include woodpeckers, turkeys, red-winged blackbirds, and red tailed hawks. Mammals include squirrels, deer, and opossums. Nature walks and birdwatching is a popular activity in the preserve.
Behind the Livingston Village Apartments is a 70 plot community garden within the Tivoli Preserve. It is Albany's largest community garden.


References

Tongpan (Thai: ทองปาน) is a 1976 Thai 16 mm black-and-white docudrama that re-creates a seminar that took place in Northeast Thailand in 1975 to discuss the proposed Pa-Mong Dam on the Mekong. Interwoven are sequences depicting a poor farmer, Tongpan, who had lost his land to another dam some years before, and his struggles to make ends meet. Because of the film's socialist message and suspected communist sympathies of the filmmakers, it was banned by the Thai government. The 63-minute film was released on VCD in Thailand in 2006.


Synopsis
It is just after 1973 democracy movement and university students from Bangkok are going to rural Thailand to talk to farmers about their cause. Among the farmers the students meet is Tongpan, a father of two children with a wife, eking out a living on rented farmland.
Years before, Tongpan had his own farm, but lost it when a dam was built. Now, a bigger dam is to be built on the Mekong. The students urge Tongpan to attend a seminar about the dam proposal and share his experience.
The seminar is attended by government officials, foreign experts, young intellectuals and local farmers. Various opinions are shared, both for and against the massive Pa-Mong Dam.
Tongpan, meanwhile, is struggling to earn a living on his small, rented patch of land. There is not enough water to grow a decent rice crop and fishstocks are dwindling. Tongpan and his wife have two boys, one still an infant. Food is so scarce, that Tongpan's wife falls ill with tuberculosis and cannot breastfeed the boy. He is paid a total of US$100 for a year of watching his landlord's chickens, and cannot hope to borrow more money to buy food for his family.
Tongpan attends the seminar, but the hardships at home weigh heavily on him, and when it comes time for him to speak, he has already gone home.


Cast
Ong-art Ponethon as Tongpan
Khamsing Srinork as Academic at seminar
Peter Bell as Hydro-electricity expert at seminar
Surachai Jantimatorn as Minstrel
Sulak Sivaraksa


Production
The filmmakers were a group of such students involved in the 1973 democracy movement, and included folk musician Surachai Jantimatorn of the songs-for-life band Caravan and director Euthana Mukdasanit.
The film was based on actual events that had occurred in 1975, and was made in Nakhon Ratchasima Province. The actor who portrayed Tongpan, Ong-art Ponethon, was a farmer and former Muay Thai boxer. He went on to act in the Vichit Kounavudhi film Son of the Northeast.


References
Tongpan VCD booklet, 2006. ISBN 974-93906-7-9
Tongpan, forbidden political film released!, ThaiCinema.org, 2006-04-19 (retrieved on 2007-01-14).


External links
Yahoo Movies
Review at Time Out
Tongpan at IMDb

George "Tosh" Barrell (7 July 1888 – 18 May 1960) was an English professional footballer who scored 26 goals from 141 appearances in the Football League playing for Lincoln City. He played at left half or as a forward.
Barrell was born in Lincoln. He played for the works team of Lincoln-based engine builders Ruston's before joining Lincoln City. He made his debut on 19 November 1908 in a 3–0 win away to Notts County Reserves in the Midland League. In the 1912–13 season, Barrell was the club's leading scorer, with 13 goals from Football League Second Division and FA Cup games, including a hat-trick at Bury. He played his last game for Lincoln City in April 1917 in the wartime competition, later playing for Ruston's again and also for Boston Town. Barrell died in 1960 aged 71.


Notes


References

The Treasure of the Holy Crosses is a group of items of high historical, artistic and religious interest kept in the Old Cathedral of Brescia in the Chapel of the Holy Crosses in the north transept. The treasure, usually locked inside a safe except during brief exhibitions, consists of:

the relic of the True Cross, known as the Illustrious Relic;
the staurotheke, an 11th-century silver-plated wooden casket, the original case to the Illustrious Relic;
the reliquary of the Holy Cross, made of silver and gold with enamels and gems, dating partly from 1487 and partly from 1532;
the Cross of the Field, the 11th-12th century silver-plated wood and gemstone cross that was hoisted on the Brescian chariot during the battles of the Lombard League;
a metal-clad wooden trunk, a work from the first half of the 15th century;
the reliquary of the Holy Thorns, an early 16th-century work by the Delle Croci from the monastery of Santa Giulia;
the reliquary of Bishop Zane's Cross, containing two more fragments of the True Cross, made in 1841 by goldsmith Antonio Pedrina.
The treasure, which has been kept in the cathedral for nearly a thousand years and expanded over the centuries, is cared for by the Company of the Custodians of the Holy Crosses, which is responsible for the maintenance of the pieces and, above all, their preservation during ordinary exhibitions, which take place on the last Friday of Lent and on the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, September 14, and extraordinary ones, which are generally linked to important liturgical events.


History


The origins of the treasure
The earliest documentary record of the treasure's existence is a provision in the Statutes of Brescia from around 1260 or 1251, by which the podestà made arrangements with the captain and the elders of the people on where to keep the treasure and to whom to entrust its keys. No earlier archival sources are known and, therefore, it is not possible to derive from the documents the origins of the treasure, particularly the history of the Illustrious Relic, which is its main focus.


The relic of the Holy Cross: legends and truths

The best-known legend explaining the origin of the treasure is the one first narrated by Jacopo Malvezzi in the first half of the fifteenth century: the historian recounts that in the early ninth century, during the transfer of the relics of Saints Faustinus and Jovita from the basilica of San Faustino ad Sanguinem (since 1956 renamed to the church of Sant'Angela Merici), the remains of the two patron saints, during a stop next to Porta Bruciata, would exude blood. Duke Naimon of Bavaria, governor of Brescia, who happened to be in the procession, witnessing the miracle immediately and publicly converted to Catholicism, immediately donating the Illustrious Relic, the Cross of the Field and the banner of the Oriflamme to the abbot of the monastery of Saints Faustinus and Jovita and entering the monastery himself as a monk. Duke Naimon, moreover, was not the first owner of the relic but, again according to the account, had received it as a gift directly from Charlemagne. Towards the end of the 11th century, after an attempted theft, the two crosses were reportedly transferred to the Old Cathedral for better and safer storage.
There is no documentation to support this legend, so much so that it is not even possible to confirm or deny the actual existence of Naimon of Bavaria, a character who appears only in some passages of the Carolingian cycle. The only documented fact of the entire legend is the transfer of the bodies of the two saints, which actually took place on May 9, 806. However, the miracle that took place during the procession can also be said to be documented, but with a margin of doubt, since on the place where the two bodies exuded blood the church of San Faustino in Riposo was founded precisely in the 9th century, which has retained its ancient appellation in reference to the "rest," that is, the pause that the procession made during the miracle.
Andrea Valentini, in 1882, summarizes other legends related to the origins of the relic and the treasure, recovered from writings of earlier authors. The scholar, among others, reports the hypotheses that the Illustrious Relic is linked to the Fourth Crusade, which left Venice in 1202, or that it was brought to Brescia by Alberto da Reggio, a city bishop who was present at the Fifth Crusade between 1219 and 1221, or that it was a gift from Gaudentius or even Philastrius, who allegedly received it directly from St. Helena.
However, the most rooted legend in historical literature subsequent to Malvezzi remains the one linked to the figure of Naimon, at least until the eighteenth century when, first with the studies of Giovanni Girolamo Gradenigo, followed by those of Giuseppe Brunati, Alessandro Sala and Federico Odorici, the critics, linking the style of the decorations on the relic to those of the staurotheke, believed to be a Byzantine work of the 12th-13th centuries, date its arrival in Brescia to the first half of the 13th century, lending credence to the legend that saw Alberto da Reggio as the donor of the Illustrious Relic. Even this conclusion, however, is not considered valid today, since new studies formulated during the twentieth century have convincingly separated, chronologically, the relic from the staurotheke.
In any case, the well-known legend of Naimon of Bavaria narrated by Malvezzi is now to be considered groundless, as Valentini already commented in 1882 suggesting that it should be "relegated to fables," and can be assumed to be a legend that was probably already fixed in the thirteenth century and later rooted by great literary fortune. It also becomes impossible, therefore, to connect the Cross of the Field to the story of the Illustrious Relic: even from a historical point of view, since the two artifacts had different origins and ended up being placed side by side in medieval times, due to the increasingly credited legend of Naimon, simply because they were kept together in the cathedral treasury.


The Cross of the Field and the staurotheke
The events at the origin of the Cross of the Field, manufactured in the Age of the Communes as the municipal cross of Brescia, to be hoisted on the chariot during battles, are equally unknown. The cross was also called the Cross of the Oriflamme, since on the chariot where it was fixed it towered over the municipal banner, called precisely Oriflamme. A reference to the Cross of the Field can perhaps be found in the hymn of the Battle of Malamorte, and it is Malvezzi again who gives news that, in addition to Rudiano, the cross was raised on the Brescian chariot at the Battle of Grumore and the Battle of Legnano. When the communal era ended, it had to end up simply kept in the treasury, gradually acquiring spiritual value as it was placed side by side with the Illustrious Relic from the legend of Naimon of Bavaria.
Also from the thirteenth century onward, some confusion in the naming of the crosses can be detected in the documents: while the Cross of the Field retains its name unchanged, the Illustrious Relic assumes the title of the Cross of the Oriflamme, when the latter was instead the second name of the Cross of the Field. The error, which remained unchanged for centuries, was corrected only from the nineteenth century onward, when the title "Cross of the Oriflamme" reverted to the second name of the Cross of the Field.
The history of the staurotheke, the original casket of the Illustrious Relic, is also unknown, but it is clear that it was made on purpose. Conversely, it is not known whether it arrived as a replacement for an earlier casket, although the obstinate will for the safekeeping over time of everything that had to do with the Illustrious Relic would be enough to rule out the possibility that a later casket existed and was later discarded.


Visconti rule

During the Visconti rule over Brescia, which began in the first half of the fourteenth century and ended a century later, the treasure must not have enjoyed a good reputation among the lords of the Milanese lineage, probably because of the great devotional fervor that the people of Brescia felt toward the Illustrious Relic. During his regency, Bernabò Visconti thwarted the memory of the treasure by having all the chronicle books, including public and private writings, concerning the memory of the Illustrious Relic and the artifacts kept along with it burned.
However, under Gian Galeazzo Visconti, the situation seems to have improved markedly: on May 13, 1400, a large group of notaries, abbots and lawyers was assembled with the aim of reconstructing the memory of the treasure through the accounts and testimonies of educated citizens, senior citizens or those who were simply able to provide information: the various contributions, after being screened and selected by the group, were collected in a large parchment, known as the Memoir of the Holy Crosses. The main testimony collected is that of the apothecary Leoncino Ceresoli, who recounts that as a boy he worked as an altar boy in the church of Saints Faustinus and Jovita and in his spare moments he would converse with the monks, among them the 90-year-old prior Antonio who had told him the legend of Naimon of Bavaria, which is entirely transcribed in the parchment of the Memoir. The apothecary's tale is confirmed under oath by other town elders, who in turn claim to have heard the same tale from other sources.
The legend is taken verbatim by historian Jacopo Malvezzi in his Chronicon Brixianum ab origine urbis published within a few years of the writing of the memoirs, inaugurating the literary fortune of the legend of Naimon of Bavaria.


The treasure in the Renaissance
The first known piece of the treasure to be added to the three originals (Cross of the Field, Illustrious Relic and staurotheke) is the small chest made in the first half of the fifteenth century to contain some secondary objects, almost all of which have been lost. The great new arrival, however, occurs in the second half of the century: on August 12, 1474, the Special Council of the city and the General Council on the 30th of the same month commissioned goldsmith Bernardino delle Croci to make a new reliquary for the fragment of the cross, similar to the one the artist was already assembling for the convent of San Domenico (lost), to be delivered by May 1475, that is, the following year.
The work, despite the deadline, did not have to be executed immediately, or else it would take a long time: on June 15, 1486, the Council resolved to recover the money with which to pay Bernardino through the sale of the silverware donated by Domenico de Dominici to the factory of the Duomo. The goldsmith's payment for his work finally arrived in 1487, a full thirteen years after the commission. The reliquary executed by Delle Croci did not initially absolve the relic's new custody: at first, it was simply fixed on top and then carried in procession, as can be seen in Moretto's Holy Cross Standard executed in 1520. When the display was finished, the relic was once again placed in the staurotheke, and the hole left at the top of the pedestal was closed with an ornate silver screw that is still kept in the treasury today, in the small chest.
The beauty of the new processional pedestal and, probably, the innovative Renaissance flurry in the arts led the Special Council to deliberate on August 29, 1532, with confirmation by the General Council on July 31, 1533, on the execution of a new reliquary for the Illustrious Relic to be fixed at the top of the already prepared pedestal, creating a single, large reliquary to replace the old staurotheke. The commission was given to goldsmith Giovanni Maria Mondella, who likely completed it in the following years.
On March 12, 1531, in the Bishop's Palace in Brescia, in the presence of a notary and various authorities from the civil and religious world, Bishop Paolo Zane donated to the community a wooden crucifix, owned by him, composed of two other fragments believed to come from the True Cross. The little cross became part of the heritage of relics of the Old Cathedral, but probably not as a component of the treasure of the Holy Crosses. It would find its final location only in 1841 in the reliquary of the same name by goldsmith Antonio Pedrina, becoming a permanent member of the treasury ever since.
In 1764 Count Bartolomeo Martinengo, president of the Company of the Custodians of the Holy Crosses, had an exact copy of the Cross of the Field made to be used as a processional cross for the regular processions organized by the company, thus avoiding the need to take out the real cross on each occasion. A reproduction of the banner of the Oriflamme, also believed by Valentini to be a copy of the lost original, was added to the new cross.


The 19th century

With the suppression of city monasteries conducted by the Brescian Republic in 1797, the treasure of the Holy Crosses was enriched with two new works transferred there from the monastery of Santa Giulia: the reliquary of the Holy Thorns and the Cross of St. Faustinus, both valuable pieces of Gothic and Renaissance art that expanded the treasure's corpus of religious relics. The reliquary held two thorns believed to have come from the crown of thorns, while the cross contained another, substantial fragment of Jesus' crucifix.
During the procession organized for the Jubilee of 1826, however, the Cross of St. Faustinus and the relic it contained were displayed to the faithful in the Church of Saints Faustinus and Jovita, enjoying great devotional success. The parish priest Giovanni Battista Lurani Cernuschi, accompanied by popular enthusiasm, requested its safekeeping, for which he offered to have a major new altar built in the church where the relic could be placed. The request was granted and, as early as 1828, the fragment of the True Cross was received in the new altar, the first on the right, inside a new, specially fabricated cross-reliquary. The original cross, for better safekeeping, was transferred to the church treasury, leaving the treasury of the Holy Crosses.
During his studies of the Cross of the Field, conducted in 1837, Giuseppe Brunati discovered that under the image of Jesus is carved in the wood a rectangular hollow from the knees to the intersection of the arms, containing numerous relics wrapped in webbing or scrolls with the explanatory inscriptions: a small stone from the Holy Sepulcher, a relic of St. Andrew, a relic of St. Faustinus, and a relic of St. Christopher.


Plans for the transfer of the treasure
The first proposal, made by Rodolfo Vantini by means of a project, to erect a new, majestic altar in the New Cathedral to which the entire treasure would be transferred dates back to 1829. The altar would be built on the north wall of the transept, mirroring that of the Blessed Sacrament by Vantini himself, which had just been completed. The proposal, though not evident from the documents, must have found a wide following right away: in 1845 two cipollino columns were purchased due to market opportunity "so that they might not be otherwise lost, and in the purpose that they might be employed, whenever that might be, in the altar to be erected in the new cathedral." Other projects, in the same year, were presented by the National Academy of St. Luke in Rome and by the Brescian architect Gaetano Clerici, both of which, however, were considered to be in disharmony with the already present altar of the Blessed Sacrament. In the years immediately following, the heated debate over the new altar continued with the continuous presentation of plans and consultations with schools and institutions, including the Brera Academy. However, as early as 1849, it was the president of the Company of Custodians, Antonio Valotti, who dropped the whole issue, as recorded in a letter between him and Clerici, postponing it "to better times" given the turbulent political situation of the Italian wars of independence.
It was necessary to wait until 1921 for new information on the issue: in that year, the cathedral factory announced a competition for the new altar of the Holy Crosses in the new cathedral, setting first at 3,000 and then at 4,000 liras the prize for the best design. From the opening to the end of the competition, in December 1922, forty designs were delivered and reviewed by a large jury. Surprisingly, the competition was declared null and void, "not finding any of the projects submitted responding in general to the essential concepts" required. However, it was decided to award, as a prize, the sum of 2,000 liras to Giovanni Silvestrini's project and 1,000 liras to Luigi Pellini's. The matter was thus again left unresolved and, partly due to the difficult political and social situation of the following decades, would not be taken up again.
The project of transferring the treasure and erecting a special altar would finally sunset in the 1980s when, in honor of Pope Paul VI, a bronze monument dedicated to him, the work of Lello Scorzelli, finally installed in 1984, would be designed for the north side of the cross vault.


The 20th century
On April 22, 1917, in the midst of World War I, the Illustrious Relic was displayed on the high altar of the New Cathedral in the presence of Bishop Giacinto Gaggia and almost all the citizens to implore divine protection over the city and the soldiers at the front. On November 10 of the same year, the treasure was extracted extraordinarily to be protected from any damage resulting from the war: the Illustrious Relic was removed from the reliquary case and given to Giacinto Gaggia, while the rest went into the custody of Superintendent Ettore Modigliani and concealed.
A similar situation was repeated on April 13, 1945, during World War II. In total secrecy, the treasure was extracted and hidden: the pedestal of Bernardino delle Croci, the staurotheke, the Cross of the Field, the reliquary of the Holy Thorns and other objects were transferred to a villa in Castenedolo, while the reliquary of Giovanni Maria Mondella, containing the Illustrious Relic, was handed over to Bishop Giacinto Tredici and concealed by him in the niche of a wall of the New Cathedral. However, there are other versions of how and where the treasure was hidden, not all of which agree with each other.
In 1957-58 the entire treasure was restored by Milanese goldsmith Agostino Figini. The staurotheke underwent the most substantial intervention: the casket had many dents, several parts of silver foil had become detached, and the Crucifixion on the lid was corroded by a very powerful acidic agent, poured at an unspecified time and for unknown reasons. During the operation all the worked foils were removed to be restored individually, while the missing parts were supplemented using smooth silver foils. The corroded area, now very friable, was cleaned and the figures strengthened by fillings in pure silver fixed with putty. Finally, the small silver nails were put back in, where they were missing. The Cross of the Field, in the same restoration, was also cleaned and supplemented of the missing fragments, although it was much less damaged than the staurotheke. Similarly, the reliquary and chest were cleaned and arranged.


The treasure


The Illustrious Relic of the Holy Cross


Description and style
The Illustrious Relic, the most important piece of the treasure from a religious point of view, consists of three wooden fragments believed to belong to the True Cross, that is, the wooden crucifix on which Jesus supposedly died. They consist of three rectangular cedar wood elements, one 14.5 centimeters long, one 6.5 centimeters and the third slightly less, each about one centimeter wide.
The three pieces are mounted together to reproduce a Latin cross with a double transverse, usually referred to as the "cross of Lorraine" or "patriarchal cross": the longer piece constitutes the central body, while the two shorter ones are the transverse arms, of which the shortest would consist of a reproduction of the titulus crucis. The ends of each piece are hooded in gold sheaths decorated by enamels with floral and geometric patterns in green, blue and red on a white background. In addition, the three pieces are tied together to form the cross by crossed gold threads.
The enamel decoration is of traditional 10th-century Byzantine style, probably produced in Constantinople. There are strong similarities with that of the staurotheke in Limburg an der Lahn from about 960 and with the reliquary of the Holy Cross in the Palatine Basilica of Santa Barbara in Mantua, which also came from Constantinople.


Historical and spiritual value
The Illustrious Relic has been, for at least a thousand years, the most important relic that has ever attracted the religious faith of the citizens of Brescia. Lodovico Baitelli wrote in 1663:

Volumes would not be enough for those who wish to recall the countless miracles worked by these Most Holy Crosses.
Over the centuries, in addition to the two ordinary annual expositions, countless extraordinary expositions were held to carry the relic in procession through the city streets, invoking divine grace for the most diverse reasons: wars, famines, sieges, droughts, epidemics. They include, among many, the procession organized during the siege of Niccolò Piccinino in 1438, the processions to invoke rain implemented from April 13 to 15, 1491, the procession against the famine on March 20, 1523, the one called after the Venetian victory at the Battle of Lepanto, those against the incessant rains on April 20, April 22 and 24, 1663, and December 1727, those, on the contrary, to invoke rain on April 4, 9 and 20, 1683, the exposition of 1705 against the German and French occupation of the territories around the city, and the impressive processions of April 27, May 3 and 11, 1732 for protection against the rinderpest epidemic.
From a historical point of view, the relic has greatly influenced the iconography of the cross in the Brescia area, very often causing the symbol of the patriarchal cross to be preferred in place of the Latin cross in numerous iconographic contexts, from painting to sculpture to miniature.


Other images


The staurotheke


Description
The staurotheke is the casket that served as the custody of the Illustrious Relic until 1532, when it was transferred to the new reliquary. It is a rectangular case, 17.8 centimeters high, 9.5 centimeters wide and three centimeters thick, made of wood covered with a thin sheet of pure silver originally gilded with mercury on every surface, although only faint hints of the gold patina remain. The foil covers every surface of the casket: the lid, the interior, and the four contour sides. The decoration that characterizes the staurotheke is rich in religious symbols, the main theme of which centers on the crucifixion of Jesus. Of particular note is that it is not a true embossed work, as the foil was not worked by tapping it from the back, but was forced by using irons and stones.
A border encircles the lid on three sides (the fourth is connected with the interior of the case) divided by thin cords into squares occupied alternately, but without rigid succession, by square, rhombus, or ovoid decorative motifs, which in turn are enclosed in a cord. The motif effectively imitates a lap of set stones, but has been largely lost. The lid depicts the crucifixion scene: in the center is the wooden cross on which Jesus is nailed, with a crusading halo around his head reclining to the left and a cloth tied around his hips. The legs descend parallel and the feet are nailed separately on a square footrest.
On the left is Mary with her face expressing sorrow, while on the right is St. John with the book of the Gospels clutched to his chest, both richly attired. Both the cross and the two lateral figures are placed atop pyramidal mounds, and the central one, from which the crucifix rises, has at its base the face of a man with closed eyes with three pieces of wood embedded in his head. This man can be identified with Adam, a symbol of the multitude of the righteous resurrected at the time of Jesus' death. At the top of the cross hangs the titulus crucis with the inscription "IC XC," meaning Iésus Christós, completing the iconography of the double transverse cross. Above the horizontal arm of the cross, on either side of the titulus, are depicted two half-length angels with wings and tunic and a veil in their hands, in an attitude of sorrowful veneration. Above, in remembrance of the solar eclipse that occurred at the death of Jesus, are the Sun on the left, depicted as a radiating disk, and a crescent moon and right, a symbol of the Moon. Finally, attached to the top of the cross is the ring that allows the casket to be opened. The staurotheke can be opened by sliding downward the lid, which slides along two rail guides.
Inside the casket is recessed the seat of the relic, which repeats the shape of a patriarchal cross, covered with red velvet. Four full sectors remain around the recess: the two lower rectangular panels are decorated with the figures of Constantine on the left and Flavia Julia Helena on the right, frontal, rigid and absorbed. The two emperors stand on barely sketched pyramidal mounds and are depicted within sumptuous gemlike robes, executed in deep detail. Inscribed alongside the two figures are their respective names in Greek: "AKOCT / ANTINC" for Constantine and "HAΓIAE / ΛENH" for Helena (Constantine's first "A" is inscribed in a circle). Serving as bases for the two emperors are two frames decorated with opposing foliage and palmettes, while at the top, between the recesses housing the cross's transverse arms, are two angels repeating those on the lid. Finally, the rib of the casket is decorated with a succession of circular medallions with an internal floral motif, but it has not been preserved in its entirety.


Style
The fine embossed silver work is to be considered stylistically in accordance with the 11th-century Lombard artistic tradition, with numerous Byzantine elements and references to Ottonian art of the period. Very strong are the connections with the blanket of the lost evangeliary of Aribert of Monza, while other references, especially in the framing with imitation set stones, are to the evangeliary also by Aribert preserved in the treasure of Milan Cathedral, both Lombard works of the 11th century. Other similarities are with the cover of the Liber Evangeliorum in the Capitular Library of Vercelli, a Lombard artwork again from the second half of the 11th century in terms of the general composition of the frames and curbs.
Even more notable are the similarities with the staurotheke preserved in the National Gallery of the Marches in Urbino from the monastery of Fonte Avellana, with which the Brescia staurotheke shares the accentuated Byzantinism. While the Urbino staurotheke is more refined and endowed with a greater sense of stylization, the Brescian staurotheke is characterized by a more evident expressionism given by the modeling, the blurred contours of the figures, and the psychological rendering of feelings. These are therefore elements that testify to a post-Ottonian influence on Lombard masters working with Byzantine bases, the artistic climate within which the Brescian staurotheke was produced.


Other images


The reliquary


Description
The large gilded reliquary has been the custody of the Illustrious Relic since 1532, when the upper reliquary was added. The lower pedestal, on the other hand, as mentioned, was made in the second half of the 15th century by Bernardino delle Croci as a support for the relic during processions. It is a very fine work of sculpture and jewelry 44.5 centimeters high and 21.5 wide at the base, made of gold, silver and enamels, all studded with a variety of gems and precious materials.
The work, fully cast, rests on eight gold spheres held by dolphin mouths descending from above, placed in the center of the concave sides of the octagonal mixtilinear base adorned with foliate motifs and astragal and beaded moldings. The first base shelf is divided into eight ogee segments alternately decorated with blue and green enamel, which in turn is covered with dense embroidery of silver filigree depicting, on each segment, an amphora on the outer edge from which symmetrical giral branches with silver balls branch out. On this base is set the first octagonal elevation, framed at the corners by rich lesenes of Corinthian order very much projected and ornamented with candelabra, on the top of which rise flower-shaped pinnacles worked with chisel. On each side of the octagon are architraved biforas surmounted by cymatiums with cornucopias, foliage, rosettes, and a central pine cone. The pilasters of the biforas themselves are decorated with candelabras, astragals, and denticles, while on each silver background is an amphora with a vertical sprig and a lily flower at the end. This first octagonal level is crowned by a portion of the hemispherical calotte also divided into enameled compartments decorated as at the base.
Set on the calotte is the second level, which repeats the one below in form and type, but the corner pilasters and related pinnacles are richer and more composite in the alternation of architectural and floral elements. The niches are no longer mullioned but have only two side pilasters with an upper lintel, complemented by a semicircular cymatium with a central shell and crowning palmette. Within the niches, which are slightly concave and enameled in very dark green, stand out silver half-length figures in full casting: six are identifiable as prophets since they bear cartouches, while two depict old men with beards and a large open volume in their hands, possibly Apostles. The second level also concludes with a glazed hemispherical cap, identical to the one below in alternating glazes and filigree embroidery. In the center of the cap, from a ring also decorated with filigree, arises a series of leaves from which rises a chalice with a surface covered with a scale motif and the upper part covered again with filigree. Out of this emerges a tuft of acanthus leaves enclosing the hole where the relic on display was originally inserted, which was closed by an ornate screw-head when the latter was removed. The pedestal by Bernardino delle Croci, later completed with the reliquary by Giovanni Maria Mondella commissioned in 1533, ends there.
The reliquary, in the shape of a double cross, like the relic, is made of two very thick quartz crystals, framed in gold. The ribbing, which surrounds and clamps the two quartz slabs, is pure gold work (1000/1000) partly done by chiseling, on the sides, and partly by casting, in the decorations on the heads of the arms. The perimeter is adorned with a continuous vine branch with dense foliage and bunches of grapes where four-lobed flowers enameled in red, green, and blue with a square-cut diamond set in the center are laid in regular succession, while other diamond heads adorn the edge. In total, there are twenty-eight flowers and heads set with as many diamonds, plus four pearls in the flowers on each of the heads of the two horizontal arms. The reliquary rests on a safety ring, which concurs with the opening of the reliquary itself, formed of a square solid gold slab decorated with red and green enameled foliage with a ruby in the center on each side. Finally, inside the reliquary are six lily-shaped gold chalices that hold the relic at the heads of the arms.
The two parts of the reliquary still retain the signatures of the authors: on the bottom of the pedestal is legible the signature of Bernardino delle Croci with the inscription ". BER'. PARA. ARG. OPERA.", while under the safety ring of the reliquary is Mondella's, ". 10. M. MONDELLA. AURIF. FECIT."


Style

The difference in style and craftsmanship between the pedestal and the reliquary appears obvious, even from the point of view of materials and technique of execution. A noble sense of construction is dominant in the pedestal: the decoration, though very rich and detailed, is only an addition to the predominant architectural concept borrowed from the centrally planned churches, with spiritual significance already very much in vogue in central Italy at the time and which was developing with increasing vitality also in Lombardy. The workmanship is meticulous, subtle, typical of the decorative style that characterized the Lombard Renaissance, but it fails to distract from the architectural scheme. In Delle Croci's reliquary, however, some Gothicizing elements remain, detectable in the various pinnacles, especially in those on the second level, and in the general conception of the architectural parts, nothing more than a pure formal translation of the Gothic biforas and cusps used in coeval (if not even later) works such as the Cross of San Faustino or the reliquary of the Holy Thorns. The work, therefore, stands qualitatively as one of the greatest achievements of Lombard proto-Renaissance goldsmithing.
In Mondella's reliquary, on the contrary, the decorative element appears to be prevalent: the architectural conception decays to be replaced by a uniquely pictorial vision, a rich refined preciosity, moreover perfect from the technical side. The use of precious gems (twenty-eight diamonds, sixteen pearls, and four rubies) is also deployed in the reliquary, and the piece is made entirely of pure gold, as opposed to the gilded silver of the pedestal. Despite these stylistic differences, however, the two parts agree with each other and tie together equally well in a unity that, on an overall view, appears real.
Finally, as far as the pedestal is concerned, it can be observed that the dolphins at the base are hollow on the inside and are chiseled, while at the spheres, at the bottom of the reliquary, there are six holes. This would lead to the conclusion that both the dolphins and the balls are of later date and that, originally, there was another type of support. The rest of the pedestal is completely worked by casting, as mentioned earlier, while no other justification would be found in the six holes under the pedestal other than that of a remaking of the supports. A deed of payment, dated April 17, 1517, in which the Company of the Custodians welds a "restoration of the plinth" of the pedestal performed to bring it back into "good and laudable form," an intervention identifiable with this supposed revision of the plinth, is preserved in regard to this issue. Illustrative, moreover, is the reproduction of the reliquary visible in Moretto's Holy Cross Standard, which, painted in 1520, appears to stylize the presence of dolphins.
The reliquary's casket is preserved, and is still in use, where it is stored when the treasure is not on display, locked inside the safe of the Holy Crosses chapel. It is the original 15th-century wooden, tall, hexagonal hood, with the handle, hinges and hooks of the time. Eighteenth-century additions, on the other hand, are the borders on the corners, in gilded metal, and the outer covering in red cloth. The hood, in the past, must have been held in no small esteem considering that, in an account of the ceremonial opening of the treasury compiled in 1683, it is referred to as "the Holy Deposit, or shall we say Sanctuary."


Other images


The Cross of the Field


Description
The Cross of the Field, also known as the Cross of the Oriflamme, is a Greek cross with arms slightly expanded at the ends, with an extension on the lower arm making it a Latin cross. It is 42 centimeters high, 28.5 centimeters wide and 5 centimeters thick, consisting of a walnut wood core entirely covered with pure silver foil with gilded silver edges attached by pegs. On one side the arms are connected by a disk, on the other by short diagonal strokes. The whole is adorned with set gems and figures worked in high relief in the silver foil.
On the front is the relief figure of Jesus, affixed to a cross of lesser embossment covered with a unitary, burin motif of dots and laths. The head is recumbent, the arms slightly bent, the legs parallel, and the feet nailed separately on a circular footrest. At the sides is knotted a long cloth. At the four ends of the arms are, also strongly embossed, the other key figures in the Crucifixion of Jesus, similarly to the staurotheke: Mary on the left, St. John on the right with the book of the Gospels at his chest, and the Sun and Moon at the top, in this case personified in two faces among which, consistently, only the first is gilded. At the bottom is placed Adam shrouded in bandages.
On the back of the cross, the four arms converge in a central roundel, also edged in gold, where is placed the Agnus Dei, worked with strong embossing. The animal holds a cross that repeats the shape of the Field Cross itself, while the head is surrounded by a halo, all in accordance with traditional symbolism. No other reliefs are present on this side. The Cross is fixed on a silver-covered wooden base, hollow on the inside, where the top of a pole was strung and then, once secured with an iron passed between the two central holes, erected on the chariot. From the sides hang two cords with tassels that, according to Andrea Valentini, were added in 1837.


Style
The dating of the Cross of the Field has been a topic of wide discussion throughout the nineteenth century and much of the twentieth century. Early nineteenth-century commentators (Giuseppe Brunati, Alessandro Sala, Federico Odorici and others) assigned the cross to a Lombard goldsmith of the late twelfth or early thirteenth century. Adolfo Venturi, in 1904, similarly said it was the work of northern Italian goldsmiths of the 12th century. Paolo Guerrini, in 1924, returned to nineteenth-century proposals, while starting with Antonio Morassi's 1939 commentary, critics settled on the shared conclusion that the cross is a Lombard work of the twelfth century.
Gaetano Panazza, in 2001, made a comparison with other works of the period, finding compositional similarities with the Cross of Aribert in the treasure of the Milan Cathedral and noting that in the latter "the figure of the Redeemer seems to sink into the cross, due to the weight of the body, with an effect similar to that noted in the Brescian cross." The cross is also a work of the Lombardy School of Fine Arts. Other similarities can be found in the burin motif that covers the crucifix of the Cross of the Field with the same motif in the background of the crucifix of the Cathedral of Vercelli, in the cover of the Evangeliary of Aribert in the treasure of the Cathedral of Milan, or in that of the Evangeliary of Matilda of Canossa, in the Morgan Library in New York, or in the Peace of Chiavenna. The scholar concludes by considering the Cross of the Field a work of Lombard goldsmithing from the late 11th or early 12th century.


Scheme of the gems


Other images


The chest

It is an artifact of secondary importance within the treasury, in which only a silver-leafed vine from the Reliquary is kept today. It also held a coin of Honorius and a votive medal, which have been lost. The case is rectangular and measures only 6 x 4.5 centimeters by 5.5 centimeters in height. It is a modest work from the first half of the fifteenth century.
The chest is made entirely of ordinary wood covered with green velvet, which in turn is banded with vertical and horizontal strips of a metal alloy of gold, silver, and copper. The lid, which can be flipped over, has a semi-cylindrical section and features an elegant handle in the center, while a shaped metal plate for the lock is placed on the front of the chest. The interior lining is rose-colored paper, watermarked with stripes.
A small red velvet purse with gold embroidery made in the second half of the sixteenth century by Bishop Gianfrancesco Morosini to hold the coin and medal mentioned earlier is preserved in the chest. Beneath the purse is a small silver box with a lid, simple and plain, containing the screw that closed the top of Bernardino delle Croci's pedestal once the Illustrious Relic had been removed, before Mondella's reliquary was affixed.


The Reliquary of the Holy Thorns

Commissioned in the early 16th century by the nuns of the Santa Giulia monastery to store two thorns believed to have come from Jesus' crown of thorns, it remained in the monastery's treasury until its suppression in 1797 at the hands of the Brescian Republic.
Taken away from the nuns, the reliquary was transferred to the treasury of the Holy Crosses, adding to the traditional components. Later, its contents were enriched: Bishop Girolamo Verzeri, during his episcopate, donated and had a third thorn added to the shrine, while Giacinto Gaggia, in 1933, inserted a small crystal cross containing a supposed fragment of the True Cross.
It is a valuable work from the early 16th century, made by Brescian manufactory in the workshop of the Delle Croci.


Bishop Zane's Cross

The cross was made in 1841 by Brescian goldsmith Antonio Pedrina and has been a permanent part of the treasure of the Holy Crosses ever since. The reliquary contains the little cross donated to the Brescian community by Bishop Paolo Zane in 1531, the custody of which predates Pedrina's. The work represents a fine example of mid-nineteenth-century Brescian neoclassical goldsmithing, whose greatest artistic relief is concentrated in the intricate relief of the pedestal.


Lost items

The treasure, during the twentieth century, saw the loss of five secondary pieces that were kept with it, likely stolen and never again found or returned.
Lost in 1917 were the three silver-plated wooden sticks that, mounted together, made up the pole of the Field Cross: the November 1, 1917 minutes of the Company of Custodians, which on that day extraordinarily opened the treasure to hide it and secure it from the war, recorded their absence, meaning that they were left out after the last display, which took place on April 22 of that year.
The other two pieces were a gold coin minted during the reign of Emperor Honorius and a copper medal. The coin had been given to Bishop Gianfrancesco Morosini by Sixtus V, who had recovered it, along with many others later distributed to various dioceses, during the reconstruction of the Lateran Palace. The medal, on the other hand, was of a votive character but neither the appearance nor the time of manufacture have come down to us, having in fact never come under the interest of scholars.
The two objects, kept in the velvet purse described earlier, were lost during studies of the Field Cross conducted in 1951. Their actual disappearance would not be noticed until five years later, on November 16, 1956, on the occasion of the first exhibition carried out at the end of the studies.
Also lost, relocated or no longer traceable are the various reliquaries and other liturgical objects, such as ciboria, tabernacles and small chests, mentioned in the inventory of the contents of a cabinet in the chapel compiled by Benettino Calino in 1623.
The Cross of St. Faustinus, which became part of the treasury in 1797 along with the reliquary of the Holy Thorns and was ceded in 1828 to the Church of Saints Faustinus and Jovita with the relic contained therein, can also be considered "lost," but actually only transferred. The artifact, from that day owned by the parish of Saints Faustinus and Jovita, is no longer part of the treasure of the Holy Crosses.


The banner of the Oriflamme

More complex is the history of the banner of the Oriflamme, the municipal banner that was hoisted on the carriage below the Cross of the Field. A first mention was reported towards the end of the 14th century by the apothecary Leoncino Ceresolo, who attested to having seen de visu, at a public exhibition, the Oriflamme which was the color of fire, but worn out because of its antiquity. He added there how around 1400 the banner, though still in existence, was no longer shown to the people.
The artifact is mentioned only twice, but very clearly, in documentary sources: it is first mentioned in an accurate description of the main components of the treasure compiled in 1663 by Lodovico Baitelli, who also mentions a fanciful but erroneous story derived from mistaken beliefs about the origin of the Illustrious Relic. Speaking of the two holes at the base of the Cross of the Field, the scholar writes:

It also has in the sides some piercing holes, to perhaps strengthen with competent chains the Cross to the pole, to make it safer from falling: or to attach the end of the traverse, from which hung the very famous Imperial Vessel woven richly with gold flames, and enriched with precious things, called by Romans Labarum, which Charlemagne, who wanted the divine sign of the Cross above all military Insignia, made himself preceded by being decorated with that most precious Cross, which passed to his hands, fabricated by the Great Constantine. This Banner dazzling with its splendors the eyes of the militia, was therefore called Oriflamme. And therefore the Cross called the Field Cross, which above its pole stood affixed, with reason, drew the name of the Oriflamme Cross [...]. Of this most glorious standard [... ] we will say that we have seen it in the Opening of the Ark of the Protector Saints, which was made by order of the Public in the Year 1623 with our own eyes as Deputies to the Ark itself, but rather shattered, and consumed, while it was of silk, and gold: for in it was wrapped the earth, which was wet with the blood that sprung (at the sight of the Lord Naimon) from the parched bones of our Most Holy Protectors, which was placed over the feet of them; and there were seen rows of gold scattered, and the ornaments that enriched it, as pearls, gold buttons, silver marquets, and similar precious things.

From Baitelli's invaluable testimony, several pieces of information are derived. First of all, it is deduced that the banner was not physically part of the treasure of the Holy Crosses, but was kept in the primitive ark of Saints Faustinus and Jovita and, since it enveloped the earth bathed in the blood of the patron saints exuded during the well-known 9th-century miracle, it was more related to the cult of the two patron saints than to that of the Illustrious Relic. The fanciful origins of the banner to which Baitelli alludes are linked to the legendary tale that developed over the centuries as an "extension" of the Naimon episode: according to that legend, the Brescian Oriflamme was the labarum made to be woven by Constantine I in person after the vision In hoc signo vinces at the battle of the Milvian Bridge, handed down to Constantine IV, then given to Charlemagne, by him delivered to Naimon of Bavaria and, finally, given to Brescia. Also present at the opening of the ark conducted in 1623 was historian Ottavio Rossi, who wrote the official report of the ceremony. What is reported in his paper seems to completely support Baitelli's note:

There lies over their [the two patrons'] feet, and over part of their legs, a very raised banner, which shows it to have been a cloth of some size, broken down throughout by antiquity. It seems to be the banner of the Oriflamme. And united with this banner much of that earth, which was bathed by that blood which miraculously flowed from them while they were transporting themselves from the Cemetery of St. Latin.
The bodies of the two patron saints were transferred to the new monumental ark in that same year, and it is probably on this occasion that the banner was lost. Conversely, given the reverence shown for it and the very fact that it contained the miraculous soil, it seems unlikely that at the time the relics were moved, the Oriflamme and its contents were simply disposed of. The loss of the banner, in this case, should be ascribed to later events, of which nothing is known. Andrea Valentini, in 1882, believed that the Oriflamme could still be found in 1764 and that the copy made then on behalf of Bernardino Martinengo was a faithful reproduction of the original, lost only later. However, this is purely Valentini's supposition and impossible to confirm.

As for the appearance of the banner, its oldest known depictions are contained in the two large canvases in the Chapel of the Holy Crosses in the Old Cathedral. The two paintings are contemporary (1605-1606), but they offer mutually different versions of the banner.
In Grazio Cossali's 'Apparition of the Cross to Constantine,' it is seen emerging from the back of a building, hanging from a pole at the top of which is fixed the Field Cross. The banner, especially in proportion to the latter, appears very large and red in color, with the monogram of Christ in the center surrounded by a laurel wreath, while around it are embroidered numerous golden flames, hence the name. The reproduction of the banner proposed in the Donation of Naimon of Bavaria, by Antonio Gandino, shows it still red in color and hanging from a pole with the Cross of the Field on top, but in proportion to the latter it is smaller and, above all, the decoration is different: in the center is a reproduction of the Illustrious Relic, a double cross, while the golden flames are smaller and neatly arranged to form a circle around the cross. There is a third and final historical reproduction of the artifact, namely the copy made by Bartolomeo Martinengo in 1764, mentioned earlier, which seems to take up both versions by Cossali and Gandino. From the former it seems to draw the red background camped with golden flames, while from the latter the reproduction of the Illustrious Relic in the center, surrounded, however, by a rayed sun.
The profound iconographic difference found in the two versions by Cossali and Gandino, which are contemporary, can perhaps be used as an indication of how difficult the banner, even then, was to reconstruct in its original appearance. From Baitelli's and Rossi's accounts comes the image of a filthy, worn banner, "broken down in everything from antiquity" and used to bind up some earth, with "scattered rows of gold" just as scattered must have been "the ornaments that enriched it." It is not a banner with clear decorations, not even a definite size, although Rossi indicates it as "a banner of somewhat large size" kept in its coiled position around the earth, not unrollable. The different versions of Cossali and Gandino thus appear legitimate, since they are reproductions of something now completely indefinable.
However, if one wishes to give a literal interpretation to Baitelli's statement that the banner was "richly woven with golden flames," then the version most faithful to the original would seem to be the one proposed by Grazio Cossali in his painting, where the red fabric is entirely covered with golden flames. If Cossali's reproduction really corresponds to reality, though, then it means that the painter conceived it on the basis of other sources or reproductions of the banner, since by the time the ark was opened in 1623 (and the subsequent testimony of Rossi and Baitelli) the banner had already been painted for more than fifteen years.


Custody of the treasure

The treasure of the Holy Crosses, of very high historical and economic value, is protected by two main levels of security. The first barrier is represented by the Chapel of the Holy Crosses itself where it is kept, access to which is protected by a thick golden grating dating back to the 1500s, flanked in the late 20th century by a laser anti-theft device. Inside the chapel, the treasure has been kept since 1935 inside a modern safe, replacing the original iron chest where it was formerly stored. The ancient chest is still preserved in the chapel.


The Chapel of the Holy Crosses
Built from September 25, 1495, with subsidization from the city council, the Chapel of the Holy Crosses is where the treasure is kept inside the Old Cathedral, in the north transept. The project, entrusted to Bernardino da Martinengo, a master mason already at work in the cathedral for the erection of the new choir, was immediately materialized, and by the early sixteenth century the treasure could be transferred from the sacristy, where it was kept, to the new chapel built for the purpose.
After a primitive decorative cycle due to Floriano Ferramola, the chapel underwent its first stylistic updates in the second half of the sixteenth century at the hands of Giovanni Maria Piantavigna, although it is unclear to what extent. On the other hand, the radical Baroque revision of the chapel was carried out between the end of the century and the first half of the seventeenth century, enriching the small room with stuccoes by Andrea Colomba, in collaboration with his son Giovanni Antonio, completed by Francesco Giugno's paintings and, above all, by the two large canvases by Antonio Gandino and Grazio Cossali, mentioned earlier. Almost contemporary is the general overhaul of the marble decorations, with Carlo Carra being entrusted with the new altar and other stoneworkers with some minor works, such as the resurfacing of the floor. The execution and placement of Moretto's Christ and the Angel as the chapel's new altarpiece can be dated to 1550. Between the end of the seventeenth century and the nineteenth century, the chapel's building activity can be said to have ended, which, on the other hand, saw the liturgical silverware patrimony increase with the arrival of many valuable pieces, including the large central lamp by goldsmith Giuseppe Lugo, placed in 1696.


The chest and the safe

The oldest archival document referring to the treasury, dating from the mid-13th century and already discussed, also contains the earliest mention of a "sacrarum," a trunk or chest, openable by means of numerous keys, in which the treasure was kept. It has come down to us, replaced in its functions only in 1931, a large gilded iron chest with a complex opening system, inside which, in earlier centuries, the treasure was stored and kept.
It is not possible to confirm that such a chest is the original "sacrarum," partly because of the various overhauls of the security system it has undergone over the centuries, but the overall workmanship can indeed be dated to the Middle Ages and it is therefore likely that it is the first and only chest ever made for treasure storage. The large chest, and consequently the treasure, were originally kept in the sacristy of the old cathedral: a document from 1423 clearly mentions the treasure "in ferrata Capsa in sacristia de Dom." It remained there until February 5, 1501, when it was transferred to the chapel of the Holy Crosses that was being completed. In the following centuries, the chest underwent some adjustments to its position within the chapel, particularly after the seventeenth-century reconstruction of the room, finding its final location in an elevated position above two columns of the Ionic order, reached by means of two side ladders.
The holders of the various keys to the chest are listed for the first time in the minutes of a meeting held on May 25, 1295. These were seven keys, three for the chest and four for the bolt, which were distributed among the representatives of the city quadras, then only four: quadra of St. Stephen, St. Alexander, St. John, and St. Faustino. To the first went one key from the casket and one from the bolt, to the second one from the casket, to the third one from the casket and one from the bolt, to the fourth two from the bolt. The second known revision of the entrusting of keys, in order of time, is a municipal provision of 1429, where it was established that the keys, reduced to six, were to be entrusted one to the podestà, one to the chancellor, one to the captain of the people, and one to the bishop or his vicar. The remaining two keys were to be entrusted, from time to time, to two "boni cives" chosen by an abbot and the elders of the people. This was followed by a new municipal provision of August 27, 1445: the document shows that the keys were increased to eight, but equally distributed between personalities of the municipality and the diocese. One key belonged to the commune's lawyer, two to the bishop, one to an archdeacon, two to the podestà, one to another archdeacon, and one to an important lawyer.
Despite these security measures, however, the chest ended up, as time went by, being regularly opened and used by the cathedral chapter: on December 21, 1579, a resolution was passed to renew the keys because books and writings were stored in the chest, degrading the sacred function of guarding the treasury. In the centuries that followed, the keys, which traditionally remained eight, appear to be under ever-changing ownership, or held only on paper and actually guarded by others, usually by figures within the municipality or diocese. Between the 18th and 19th centuries the custody of the keys stabilized with one key entrusted to the bishop and the other seven to the municipality.
The operation of the chest is clearly described in some minutes of the opening of the treasury drawn up between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Reported here, among others, is the specific passage taken from the minutes of May 3, 1901:

Having climbed the ladder at the back of the chapel altar, it was found that the locks with which the iron chest secured to the floor and in the wall behind it were closed. [...] Having opened the locks, it was thus possible to lower the flap, which tipped over on the underside and left a strong grating uncovered, freeing the lid. The heavy lid was then lifted and secured to the wall by means of the hooks provided, and a second wooden chest solidly joined on the bottom and closed with two locks on the front was discovered inside the first chest. Introducing his hands into the compartments of the grating, the representative of the municipality with the keys marked with the numbers 7 and 8 opened the aforementioned two locks and lifted and secured the lid of the second crate, it was verified that in it exists a small wooden box covered with red velvet [containing the staurotheke]; in a round case enclosed in a bag of red silk cloth, clasped at the top by a sheath cord a hood covered with red satin [containing the reliquary] and three pieces of silver-plated wood constituting the shaft in which the Field Cross was pivoted [lost].
In 1931, the Company of Custodians deliberated the replacement of the chest with a modern safe, which was purchased and placed where it still stands today, in the small compartment below the large chest, on December 23, 1935. Thus ended the centuries-old tradition of the eight keys, which were reduced to three: one entrusted to the bishop, one to the mayor of the city, and one to the president of the Company of Custodians. The safe, dark red in color, consists of six-centimeter-thick steel walls and is armored, which can be opened by the three separate locks. Inside, it is lined with styrofoam to prevent moisture and infiltration.
The safe includes a second compartment, in the lower half, where the reliquary of the Holy Thorns and Bishop Zane's Cross are kept, which are also usually displayed during other holidays, such as Lent. The compartment, which is the exclusive responsibility of the diocese, is closed by a door with a single lock and the key is kept in the Old Cathedral.


The Company of Custodians

The earliest historical document testifying to the existence of a lay company with the objective of guarding the treasure is a resolution of the municipality of Brescia dated March 3, 1520, in which the council accepted a request made by Mattia Ugoni, bishop of Famagusta and suffragan of the bishop of Brescia Paolo Zane, in which the prelate asked that a grant of one hundred liras be granted for the benefit of a confraternity described as recently established "in honor" of the treasure of the Holy Crosses. Also requested were the commissioning of its own processional standard, to be executed by Moretto, and urgent masonry work in the chapel of the Holy Crosses, which had been completed twenty years earlier.
Over the centuries, the company carried out and supported all the operations of managing, safeguarding, administering and defending the treasure, maintaining its integrity and taking care of its upkeep, as well as the chapel of the Holy Crosses in which it was and still is kept. After the nineteenth-century secularization and the reduction, to the point of disappearance, of most of the activities that made the administration of the confraternity necessary and gave a purpose to its existence (processions, suffragan masses, chapel beautification, purchase and sale of movable property, and so on), the Company of Custodians soon lapsed into a role of pure representation. This does not detract, however, from the fact that any managerial or administrative intervention concerning the treasury and chapel (restoration or maintenance) is still deliberated and supervised by the brethren.
An active role of particular note is the presence of many members of the company during the two annual ordinary exhibitions of the treasury. Secondly, the company promotes and finances publications on the subject and generally participates in major religious events in the city.


The expositions

The treasure of the Holy Crosses is regularly presented to the public in two ordinary annual displays: on September 14, the feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and on the penultimate Friday of Lent. On these occasions, the treasure is displayed in its entirety in the New Cathedral on pedestals specially placed at the foot of the steps leading to the chancel.
In addition to the ordinary displays, there are usually a number of other extraordinary ones each year, organized on the occasion of important ceremonies or major events in the city's religious life. Private expositions for individuals are also granted, but on much rarer occasions, according to a very ancient tradition that has never been challenged: the first documented exposition of this kind dates back to 1423, when the city municipality resolved that the Holy Crosses, "cum debita reverentia," be shown in private to Pietro Visconti. This happened several times over the centuries, always with municipal permission.
On the other hand, very frequent in the past and now disappeared were the processions in which the Holy Crosses, especially the Illustrious Relic, were carried along the city streets amid monumental processions and liturgical apparatuses, usually to implore divine protection against epidemics, famines, wars and more.
Already mentioned is also the different display methodology reserved for the reliquary of the Holy Thorns and the Cross of Bishop Zane: the two artifacts are in fact the exclusive responsibility of the diocese and are kept in a separate compartment of the safe, for the opening of which the use of the key guarded by the mayor is not necessary. The two reliquaries are therefore taken out and displayed to the public more frequently and on different occasions, such as during Lent.
However, the treasure, despite ordinary and extraordinary displays, remains considerably hidden from the eyes of the public. Gaetano Panazza wrote in 2001, "Precisely because of this multiplicity of its values, it is regrettable to note that it is one of the few treasures that are still not accessible, except with great difficulty and for a very short time, to the veneration of the faithful, to the admiration of scholars."


See also
Old Cathedral, Brescia
Santi Faustino e Giovita, Brescia


References


Bibliography
Ancient sources
Baitelli, Lodovico (1663). Breve Historia delle Santissime Croci. Brescia.
Bianchi, Giovanni (1683). Succinta relatione delle solennissime processioni fatte in Brescia quest'anno 1683. Brescia.
Biemmi, Giammaria (1748). Istoria di Brescia. Vol. 1. Brescia: Per Giovanni Colombo Libraro dietro alla Loggia.
Brunati, Giuseppe (1839). Di un'antica stauroteca istoriata che si conserva nella vecchia Cattedrale di Brescia. Roma: Tipografia delle Belle Arti.
Cartari, Giovanni Battista (1663). Le Croci Bresciane ovvero Discorso sopra le croci dell'Oro Fiamma e del Campo. Brescia.
Cazzago, Alfonso (1718). Libro che contiene tutti i successi di Brescia scritti da me Alfonso Cazzago principiando l'anno 1700 sino a quando Dio mi darà questa vita. Brescia.
Anonymous chronicler (1799). Compendio storico delle Santissime Croci d'Oro-Fiamma, e del Campo che si venerano nella città di Brescia. Brescia.
Gagliardi, Filippo (1732). Notizia della santissime croci Orofiamma e del Campo. Brescia.
Gambara, Francesco (1839). Ragionamenti di cose patrie ad uso della gioventù. Vol. 1. Brescia: Tipografia Venturini.
Gradenigo, Giovanni Girolamo (1755). Pontificum brixianorum series commentario historico illustrata, opera et studio Joannis Hieronymi Gradonici (in Latin). Brescia: ex typographia Joannis Baptistæ Bossini.
Malvezzi, Jacopo (1732). "Chronicon Brixianum ab origine urbis ad annum MCCCXXXII". In Ludovico Antonio Muratori (ed.). Rerum Italicarum Scriptores. Vol. XXI. Milano.
Odorici, Federico (1853). Guida di Brescia - Rapporto alle arti ed ai monumenti antichi e moderni. Brescia: Francesco Cavalieri.
Rossi, Ottavio (1623). Relatione dell'Aprimento dell'Arca de' Santissimi Protomartiri, et Patroni della Città di Brescia, Faustino, et Giovita. Brescia.
Rossi, Ottavio (1624). Historia de' Gloriosissimi Santi Martiri Faustino et Giovita. Brescia.
Sala, Alessandro (1834). Pitture ed altri oggetti di belle arti in Brescia. Brescia.
Valentini, Andrea (1882). Le Santissime Croci di Brescia. Brescia.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Modern sources
Accascina, Maria (1934). L'oreficeria italiana. Firenze.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Alessandro Barbieri (2012). "Il Reliquiario della Santissima Croce del tesoro del Duomo Vecchio di Brescia". Arte Lombarda. Nuova Serie (164/165 (1-2)). Vita e Pensiero: 25–56. ISSN 0004-3443. JSTOR 43106509.
Begni Redona, Pier Virgilio (2001). "L'apporto dell'arte alla devozione delle Sante Croci". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). Le Sante Croci - Devozione antica dei bresciani. Brescia: Tipografia Camuna.
Fappani, Antonio, ed. (1978), Enciclopedia bresciana, vol. 3, Brescia: La Voce del Popolo
Guerrini, Paolo (1924). Il tesoro delle Sante Croci nella storia e nell'arte: discorso letto nella Cattedrale di Brescia la sera del 3 maggio 1924. Brescia: Morcelliana.
Masetti Zannini, Antonio; Balestrini, Fausto (1996). Pergamena sulla memoria delle Sante Croci.
Massa, Renata (1988). Orafi e argentieri bresciani nei secoli XVIII e XIX. Brescia: Apollonio.
Massa, Renata (1997). "Reliquiario delle Sante Spine". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). Nel lume del Rinascimento: dipinti, sculture ed oggetti dalla Diocesi di Brescia. Brescia: Museo diocesano di Brescia.
Morassi, Antonio (1936). Antica oreficeria italiana. Milano: Hoepli.
Morassi, Antonio (1939). Catalogo delle cose d'arte e di antichità in Italia: Brescia. Roma: Libreria dello Stato.
Pagiaro, Sergio (1985). Santuario Sant'Angela Merici. Bagnolo Mella: Litografica Bagnolese.
Panazza, Gaetano (1977). Il tesoro delle Santissime Croci nel Duomo vecchio di Brescia. Brescia: Compagnia dei Custodi delle Sante Croci.
Panazza, Gaetano (2001). "Il tesoro delle Sante Croci nel Duomo vecchio di Brescia". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). Le Sante Croci - Devozione antica dei bresciani. Brescia: Tipografia Camuna.
Panteghini, Ivo (1999). "Il tesoro della chiesa di San Faustino". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). La chiesa e il monastero benedettino di San Faustino Maggiore in Brescia. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.
Passamani, Bruno (2001). "Artisti, apparatori, macchine, teatralità per i tridui delle Sante Croci nella "Magnifica Città di Brescia"". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). Le Sante Croci - Devozione antica dei bresciani. Brescia: Tipografia Camuna.
Peroni, Adriano (1964). "L'oreficeria dei secoli XV e XVI". In Giovanni Treccani degli Alfieri (ed.). Storia di Brescia. Brescia: Treccani.
Prestini, Rossana (1999). "Regesto". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). La chiesa e il monastero benedettino di San Faustino Maggiore in Brescia. Brescia: Editrice La Scuola.
Prestini, Rossana (2001). "Regesto storico artistico - Documenti". In A.A.V.V. (ed.). Le Sante Croci - Devozione antica dei bresciani. Brescia: Tipografia Camuna.
Venturi, Adolfo (1904). "L'esposizione dell'Arte Sacra in Brescia". L'arte. Rome: Danesi – Hoepli.
Vezzoli, Giovanni (1980). Il Duomo Nuovo e il Duomo Vecchio di Brescia: guida alle cattedrali. Brescia.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Volta, Valentino (1984). "Il contratto (inedito) di Bernardino con i deputati del Comune". AB - Atlante Bresciano (1).

Trezzano Rosa (local Lombard: Trescian) is a comune (municipality) in the Province of Milan in the Italian region Lombardy, located about 30 kilometres (19 mi) northeast of Milan. As of 31 December 2004, it had a population of 3,992 and an area of 3.5 square kilometres (1.4 mi2).
Trezzano Rosa borders the following municipalities: Busnago, Roncello, Grezzago, Basiano, Pozzo d'Adda.


Demographic evolution


References


External links
www.comune.trezzanorosa.mi.it/

Tritoma is a large genus of beetles in the family Erotylidae, the pleasing fungus beetles. It is distributed mainly in the temperate parts of Eurasia, with a large evolutionary radiation in Japan. They are less diverse in North America (where a mere handful of species occur in the east) and the tropics (where records are scarce except for the abundant Tritoma dorsalis of Central America). Among its family, this genus is placed in subfamily Tritominae, or – in taxonomic arrangements that prefer a more comprehensive subfamily Erotylinae – in tribe Tritomini of the Erotylinae. As of 1999, over 100 species were recognized, and since then a handful of previously unknown ones has been described; however, the monophyly of Tritoma sensu lato is spurious and several species are being moved to new or revalidated genera in recent years.


Description
Adult Tritoma beetles are small, generally less than one-quarter of an inch or 8 mm long and a bit more than half as wide. They have an oval body shape, widest slightly before the middle, with  parabola-shaped wingtips and a blunter head. From the closely related genus Triplax, Tritoma sensu lato can be distinguished by a shorter and rounder body, with wider and more markedly tapering elytra, and long lines on the prosternum which extend forward of the attachment points of the forelegs and curve inwards towards the headward tip of the prosternum. The enigmatic and doubtfully distinct Pseudischyrus is extremely similar to Tritoma, but under a magnifying glass can immediately be recognized by their large compound eyes with huge ommatidia.
Like many of their relatives, these beetles usually have a black-and-reddish coloration. Usually, they are mostly black; the orange-red color is typically limited to two large spots on the "shoulders" of the elytra, to the pronotum, or to the underside. While slight differences in color pattern (such as a black vs orange underside) are often diagnostic for species, some Tritoma have subspecies or color morphs that strikingly differ in the location and extent of the orange-red markings.

Head
The head has small compound eyes have tiny ommatidia, indicating a diurnal or crepuscular lifestyle, but with overall rather little reliance on eyesight. All Tritoma adults possess file-like structures at the sides of the neck attachment, which, when the beetle wiggles its head, rub against the chitin and produce a squeaking sound; the degree of development of these structures is generally unreliable for distinguishing males and females. The epistome has a narrow but unbroken margin around the tip, which is either straight or slightly concave; a transverse stripe separates the margin from the bulk of the epistome. The "cheek" lobes below the compound eyes are vestigial, do not reach to the lower edge of the eyes, and are usually fully covered by the ends of the maxillary palps. The antenna length is less than half of the pronotal base width, with antenna segment 3 almost as long as the segments 4 and 5 together, and a "clubbed" antenna tip which is about half again as long as it is wide, usually only consists of the last 3 segments, and ends with a small segment 11.
The galea and lacinia of the maxilla resemble those of the related genera Ischyrus and Pseudischyrus; those of Triplax are also similar except for having two small curved teeth at the tip of the lacinia. The maxillary palps have an end segment that is rounded, somewhat triangular, and a bit more than half as long as it is wide. At a casual glance it does not seem to carry a brush, but in some species a vestigial brush is hidden within a slit at the tip. The labium has a mentum that is mid-sized and fairly narrowly triangular. The labial palps end in a narrow segment – less wide than the end segment of the maxillary palps – with a strong bristle at the outer side and a tiny brush at the tip, and the mouth-cavity sides are flattened lobes.
Body, wings and legs
The prothorax is almost as wide at the base as the wings at their widest point. The pronotum is fairly wide and trapezoid-shaped, with the rear edge more than half again as long as the forward edge. A thin margin runs around the sides and front of the pronotum, but is absent from the rear. In each corner of the pronotum, there is a small and inconspicuous pore. The prosternum is bell-shaped, with lengthwise lines at the center margin of the leg attachments extending to the forward edge of the prosternum, sharply curving towards each other in front of the leg attachments, and in some species even meeting at the tip of the prosternum to enclose a flattened triangular central area between them.
On the metasternum, the lines between the leg attachments are clearly engraved, and extend at least halfway between the rear edge of the leg attachment and the side of the metasternum. The scutellum is bluntly heart-shaped. The elytra are ornamented with regular lines of small punctuations; they also lack a distinct margin at the base, except for a very slim margin in front of the "shoulders".
The attachments of each leg pair are widely separated. The tibiae are widened towards the ends, very much so in some species but only slightly in others; their upper/outer edge is narrowed to a very thin "razor edge" towards the tip. On the forelegs, the tips of the tibiae are hollowed. The first three segments of the tarsi are increasingly widened; segment 4 of the tarsi is reduced, attached to the upper centerside of segment 3, and rigidly joined to segment 5.
On the abdomen, coxal lines are present, and the intercoxal process is wide and has a cut-off or slightly rounded tip. Males and females do not have conspicuously different external abdominal structures. The aedeagus of the male genitalia resembles Pseudischyrus. The tegminal arms are firmly joined at the forward end, form a tooth-like lobe on the upper sides just in front of the basal piece, and have a narrow and almost membranous section below. The median strut does not exceed the median lobe in length. The internal sac is of varying length but tends to be short and entirely hidden within the sclerotized median lobe; in some species it is longer and protrudes from the lobe's central hole to almost half the length of the median strut. Its anterior end lacks conspicuous point-like muscle attachments, but in some species has a number of short lengthwise sclerotized stripes. The ejaculatory duct does not continue into the internal sac. The female genitalia are strikingly shortened, seeming almost vestigial in some species, but all parts are present and functional. Only the proctigeral and vulvar lobes are close to the typical size in Erotylidae; at the eighth abdominal segment, the genital tube has short and usually weakly sclerotized lines. The seminal receptacle is small, rounded, and bears a short well-sclerotized arm. Overall, sclerotization of the female genitalia varies considerably between members of this genus, and in some Tritoma the styli are shortened to barely more than half their width.


Distribution and ecology
Tritoma is a mostly Eurasian genus, with about 80% of its known diversity occurring there; they are more plentiful towards the east, but their European diversity still exceeds the total number of known species outside Eurasia. Only a single species each is known so far from Australia and the Neotropics, and about a dozen from sub-Saharan Africa; the number of North American species is not definitely resolved, but probably just a handful, all of which occur in the more humid regions to the east of the 100th meridian west.
Some Tritoma species consume euagaric mushrooms, staying concealed amidst the gills as they feed. Some feed on mushrooms growing from dead trees, as well as mycorrhizae on living roots. Unlike Triplax, which are often encountered in large groups on a single mushroom, Tritoma typically associate only in small numbers. Larvae and pupae of several species have been studied.
One of the most common pleasing fungus beetles in Europe, T.bipustulata, is a black beetle with red spots which engages in autohaemorrhaging as a defensive behavior.


Taxonomy and systematics
Molecular analysis suggests that Tritoma in its traditional circumscription is paraphyletic, and even the few North American species seem to represent at least two well-distinct genera: The lineage containing the uniformly dark-winged T.erythrocephala and T.unicolor appears to be far more closely related to the iridescent Spondotriplax antennalis from New Guinea than to "T."pulchra with bicolored wings; the latter appears as sister to an unidentified species which resembles a member of the Neotropical genus Mycotretus but does not seem to be closely related to Mycotretus scitulus. Consequently, species such as "T."consobrina and "T."pulchra are often moved to the mostly Northeast Asian genus Aporotritoma nowadays, while "T."sanguinipennis is placed in Rotitma, likewise mainly Asian. But more research into the phylogeny of these beetles is needed to come to a robust conclusion on the most appropriate taxonomic treatment. Earlier authors had already noted that North American Tritoma sensu stricto usually feed on gilled fungi, while "T."pulchra and "T."sanguinipennis are typically found on polypores.
Historically, genera such as Motrita, Ortitma, Pseudotritoma, Trimota, Triplacidea and even Triplax were included in Tritoma by various authors, but nowadays they are generally considered distinct. Also, the enigmatic North American genus Pseudischyrus is so similar to certain Tritoma species even in the details of its genital anatomy that its distinctness requires verification; it probably also belongs into Tritoma sensu lato.
The only established synonym of genus Tritoma, Cyrtotriplax, is not available to use for split-off genera. It was proposed by George Crotch in 1873 to replace Tritoma. That name had been first used in Étienne Geoffroy's 1762 Histoire abrégée des Insectes for the genus commonly called Mycetophagus from the late 18th century onwards – these are hairy fungus beetles, superficially similar but not particularly closely related to the pleasing fungus beetles described as Tritoma by Johan Fabricius in 1775. This mix-up caused considerable misunderstanding among coleopterologists throughout the 19th and 20th century, until the ICZN in 1994 fixed Fabricius' publication as the official establishment of the genus and invalidated Geoffroy's description, conserving the use of Tritoma for the pleasing fungus beetle and Mycetophagus for the hairy fungus beetle. Cyrtotriplax, which used T.bipustulata as its type species just like Fabricius' Tritoma does, thus became an objective synonym, and unavailable for any split-off genera.


Species

This species list is provisional; several species listed here would probably warrant placement in another genus.

"Tritoma livida", named by Jean Lacordaire in 1842, is an individual caught soon after emerging from the pupa; it was misidentified as a new species because it had not yet developed its mature coloration. Most likely, it belongs to either T.biguttata affinis or to T.angulata.
A supposed Tritoma species from Isla de Mona near Puerto Rico collected by J. A. Ramos in the early 20th century is actually a species of the monommatine beetle genus Hyporhagus. These deceptively resemble certain erotylid beetles (such as Tritoma) in overall appearance, but actually belong to another branch of Cucujiformia. With the proposed occurrence of "Tritoma sellata" on Cuba apparently being in error too, as of 2009, no verified Tritoma records were known from the Caribbean offshore islands.
In addition, a fossil Erotylidae beetle described originally as Mycotretus binotata by Samuel Scudder in 1878 has been assigned to Tritoma due to its great resemblance to "T." sanguinipennis; it would probably belong to Rotitma if "T." sanguinipennis is validly placed there. Its specimen MCZ 4183 was found in the Lake Gosiute Green River Formation of Wyoming and originally assumed to be of Oligocene age; today, it is assumed to have been lived somewhat later, in the Early Eocene roughly 50 million years ago.
There are also fossil remains from Baltic amber that were assigned to this genus.


References

Trygve Berge (19 April 1932 – 2 April 2026) was a Norwegian alpine skier. 


Biography
Berge was born in Voss Municipality on 19 April 1932, and grew up on the farm Brekke in Gullfjordungen in Voss.
He participated at the 1956 Winter Olympics in  Cortina d'Ampezzo, where he competed in downhill. He became Norwegian champion in downhill in 1956.
In 1958 he moved to the United States, working as a professional ski instructor, and eventually became a central person in establishing the Breckenridge Ski Resort in the Rocky Mountains.
Berge died on 2 April 2026, at the age of 93.


References


External links
Trygve Berge at Olympedia

Turbo cailletii, common name the filose turban, is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family Turbinidae, the turban snails.


Distribution
This species occurs in the Gulf of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea and the Lesser Antilles.


Description
The maximum recorded shell length is 37 mm.
The ovate-conic shell is perforate, solid, and shining. The sutures are impressed. The 5-6 whorls are convex, rounded, and spirally lirate. The body whorl exceeds the balance of the shell in length. It contains six prominent spiral lirae and is minutely lirate around the umbilicus. The ovate aperture is transversely dilated, and silvery within. The peristome is acute. The white columella is thickened. The color pattern of the shell is intense orange-red, the lirae are punctate with white. The white operculum is convex on its outside.


Habitat
Minimum recorded depth is 4 m. Maximum recorded depth is 36 m.


References
Notes

Bibliography
Wood, W. 1828. Supplement to the Index Testaceologicus.  viii + 59 pp., 8 pls. W. Wood: London.
Fischer, [P.] and Bernardi, [A. C.] 1857. Descriptions d'espèces nouvelles. Journal de Conchyliologie 5: 292–300, pls. 8-9
Turgeon, D.D., et al. 1998. Common and scientific names of aquatic invertebrates of the United States and Canada. American Fisheries Society Special Publication 26 page(s): 60
Alf A. & Kreipl K. (2003). A Conchological Iconography: The Family Turbinidae, Subfamily Turbininae, Genus Turbo. Conchbooks, Hackenheim Germany.
Rosenberg, G., F. Moretzsohn, and E. F. García. 2009. Gastropoda (Mollusca) of the Gulf of Mexico, Pp. 579–699 in Felder, D.L. and D.K. Camp (eds.), Gulf of Mexico–Origins, Waters, and Biota. Biodiversity. Texas A&M Press, College Station, Texas.


External links

"Turbo (Taeniaturbo) cailletii". Gastropods.com. Retrieved 16 January 2019.

txt.fyi is a minimalist online publishing platform and pastebin website developed by Rob Beschizza, co-editor of the tech culture website Boing Boing. Created to avoid the "baroque and falsified quantifiers of social capital" associated with social networks and other platforms, txt.fyi prioritizes "legible, no-nonsense static hypertext", forbids search engines from indexing its content, and has no advertising, web analytics or user tracking. Authors may use plain text or Markdown to compose posts. The website was closed in 2022 and re-launched in 2024.
Wired Magazine described it as an example of "antiviral design," challenging the "social media ecosystem's invasive approach to user privacy," while The Verge reported that it created an incentive to write "without worrying about having an audience or a conversation or a persistent online persona." Observer chose it as one of "three places to write anonymously online" and praised its simplicity while criticizing its lack of features.


See also
IndieWeb
Snippet (programming)


References


External links
Official website
Introducing “antisocial media” for those sick of viral content – article in Twin Cities Agenda

Tyler Labine (born April 29, 1978) is a Canadian actor. He is best known for starring in the film Tucker & Dale vs. Evil, the television series Breaker High, Invasion, Reaper, Deadbeat and as Dr. Iggy Frome, head of psychiatry, in the NBC medical drama New Amsterdam.


Life and career
Labine grew up in Maple Ridge, British Columbia. He is the brother of actors Kyle Labine and Cameron Labine. He played the role of Dave Groves in Invasion, and Bert "Sock" Wysocki in Reaper, and Dale in the comedy-horror film Tucker & Dale vs. Evil. He played the lead character in the 2010 Fox comedy series Sons of Tucson, but the show was cancelled after four episodes (the remaining nine episodes that were shot aired that summer).
He also played Jimmy Mortimor Farrell on YTV's Breaker High from 1997 to 1998. In 2011, he co-starred in the CBS comedy Mad Love as Larry Munsch. He starred in the NBC comedy series Animal Practice alongside Justin Kirk and Bobby Lee, which premiered in September 2012. He also starred in the Hulu show Deadbeat. In 2017, he played Sherlock Hobbs in the second season of Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency.
From 2018 to 2023, he was part of the main cast of New Amsterdam where he played Head of Psychiatry, Dr. Iggy Frome.


Personal life

Labine married Carrie Ruscheinsky on June 2, 2007. In 2022, Labine stated during an Instagram Live that he identifies as heteroflexible. He was hospitalized in July 2023 for a potentially fatal blood clot in his stomach.


Filmography


Film


Television


Video games


References


External links

Tyler Labine at IMDb

UNI Global Union, formally Union Network International (UNI), is a global union federation for the skills and services sectors, uniting national and regional trade unions. It has affiliated unions in 150 countries representing 20 million workers. The Global headquarters is in Nyon, Switzerland. As of 2021, UNI Global Union had ratified over 50 Global Framework Agreements with multinational corporations, including ABN AMRO, Carrefour, H&M, DHL, Telefonica, BNP Orange and Banco de Brazil, Inditex Group, and Kimberly Clark among others.


History
UNI was the result of the merger of four global union federations: International Federation of Commercial, Clerical, Professional and Technical Employees (FIET), Media and Entertainment International (MEI), International Graphical Federation (IGF), and Communications International (CI). They merged on 1 January 2000, to form Union Network International. On 2 March 2009, the federation changed its name to UNI Global Union.


International Federation of Commercial, Clerical, Professional and Technical Employees (FIET)
The first attempt to create an international federation of clerical workers was the International Commercial Employees' Secretariat, founded in Hamburg in 1909 and led by Edo Fimmen. This organization collapsed at the start of World War I, leading to the establishment of FIET in 1921 in Vienna. Initially, FIET represented only European unions, but after World War II, it began admitting unions from around the world. By 1994, FIET's membership had reached 11 million. FIET predominantly represented workers in banking, insurance, and clerical staff in commerce and social services. In 1984, the International Secretariat of Entertainment Trade Unions became an autonomous section of FIET.


Media and Entertainment International (MEI)
MEI was a global union federation representing workers in the arts, established in 1993 through the merger of the International Secretariat of Arts, Communications, Media and Entertainment Trade Unions and the International Federation of Trade Unions of Audio-Visual Workers. Initially named the International Secretariat for Arts, Mass Media, and Entertainment Trade Unions (ISAMMETU), it was renamed MEI in 1995. MEI campaigned for public service broadcasting and minimum working conditions for freelance film and theatre workers. On 1 January 2000, MEI merged with FIET, IGF, and CI to form Union Network International.


International Graphical Federation (IGF)
The IGF was a global union federation for printing workers. Efforts to establish this federation began in 1939, but it was officially founded in 1949 in Stockholm after World War II delayed its formation. The IGF focused on technical developments in the industry and sharing information on industrial disputes and employment standards. The federation operated on a non-political basis and had three boards covering typography, lithography, and bookbinding. By the end of 1999, the IGF merged with FIET, CI, and MEI to form Union Network International.


Communications International (CI)
The Postal, Telegraph and Telephone International (PTTI) was the precursor to Communications International (CI). Founded in 1920 in Milan, it initially consisted of European unions but expanded globally after World War II. By 1994, it had four million members from various continents. Recognizing the importance of new forms of communication, the federation renamed itself as Communications International in 1997. At the end of 1999, CI merged with FIET, IGF, and MEI to form Union Network International.


Global Agreements


Societe Generale Agreement
In 2023, UNI Global Union renewed its global agreement with Societe Generale. This new three-year agreement, building on previous accords from 2015 and 2019, includes enhanced commitments to combat discrimination, foster a safe working environment, and uphold workers' rights to freedom of association. The agreement covers 147,000 employees across 67 countries, emphasizing the bank's dedication to human rights and social dialogue.


Campaigns and Labor Actions


Right to Disconnect Campaign
UNI Global Union has launched a global campaign to help workers reclaim their right to disconnect from their jobs. This campaign, supported by detailed guidelines for negotiating disconnection terms, aims to combat the anxiety, depression, and burnout associated with constant connectivity. Agreements have already been secured with major companies like Telefonica and Orange.


IKEA Group Dispute
In July 2023, the Dutch National Contact Point published the final statement on the dispute between UNI Global Union and IKEA Group. The dispute centered on workers' freedom of association in IKEA’s operations in Ireland, Portugal, and the USA. The process facilitated by the NCP led to agreements in Portugal but not yet in the USA or Ireland. The final statement included recommendations for improving labor relations and ensuring the right to organize.


Leadership


General secretaries
2000: Philip Jennings
2018: Christy Hoffman


Presidents
2000: Kurt van Haaren
2001: Maj-Len Remahl
2003: Joseph T. Hansen
2010: Joe de Bruyn
2014: Ann Selin
2018: Ruben Cortina
2023: Gerard Dwyer


References


External links

 Media related to UNI Global Union at Wikimedia Commons
Official website

Hiroshi Ueda (上田 裕司, Ueda Hiroshi; 20 June 1940 – 21 December 2011) was a Japanese professional wrestler, better known by his ring name Umanosuke Ueda (上田 馬之助, Ueda Umanosuke).  During his wrestling career, Ueda primarily stood out for wrestling with bleached blonde hair, a practice which was rare in his day but later became more common.  His ring name was inspired by samurai warrior and Shinsengumi member Umanosuke Ueda.


Professional wrestling career
After debuting in the old Japan Pro Wrestling Alliance in 1961, he started the circuit in Los Angeles in 1966. In 1974, he joined Japan's International Pro Wrestling where he held the IWA World Heavyweight Championship from June 11, 1976, till July 28, 1976. Ueda was considered one of the first "traitor heels" in Japan, as he broke societal mores by dyeing his hair and using a brawling style, and teaming with a hated gaikokujin heel, Tiger Jeet Singh. The two men were the first team to win tag team titles in both New Japan Pro-Wrestling (the NWA North American Tag Team Championship) and All Japan Pro Wrestling (the NWA International Tag Team Championship).
Mr. Gannosuke, Tatsutoshi Goto and Toru Yano later based their "dye job brawler" ring personas on Ueda's style. More recently, Takaaki Watanabe has based his "Evil" persona on Ueda.
He later went on to appear as a henchman in the Japanese game show Takeshi's Castle up until the end of the show in the late '80s and also appeared in the movie Burst City.
In 1996, he was in a car accident, which left him paralyzed and eventually forced him to retire two years later.
Ueda died on December 21, 2011, from respiratory failure; he was 71 years old.


Championships and accomplishments
All Japan Pro Wrestling
NWA International Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Kintarō Ōki (1) and Tiger Jeet Singh (1)
International Wrestling Enterprise
IWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Mid-South Sports
NWA Georgia Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Chati Yokouchi
New Japan Pro-Wrestling
Asia Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Tiger Jeet Singh
NWA North American Tag Team Championship (Los Angeles/Japan version) (1 time) - with Tiger Jeet Singh
NWA Big Time Wrestling
NWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Chati Yokouchi
NWA Mid-America
NWA World Tag Team Championship (Mid-America version) (1 time) - with Tojo Yamamoto
NWA Tri-State
NWA World Junior Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Tokyo Sports
Popularity Award (1978)
Western States Sports
NWA Western States Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Chati Yokouchi
NWA World Tag Team Championship (Amarillo version) (1 time) - with Chati Yokouchi
World Wrestling Organization
WWO Heavyweight Championship (1 time)


References


External links
Umanosuke Ueda at PuroresuCentral.com
Umanosuke Ueda's profile at Cagematch , Internet Wrestling Database 
Umanosuke Ueda at IMDb

Umrika (transl. America) is a 2015 Indian Hindi comedy-drama film written and directed by Prashant Nair, and produced by Swati Shetty and Manish Mundra. It features Suraj Sharma, Tony Revolori, Smita Tambe, Rajesh Tailang, Pramod Pathak, Adil Hussain, Amit Sial, Sauraseni Maitra and Prateik Babbar.
Umrika premiered at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival, where it won the World Cinema Dramatic Audience Award. Director Nair said that the film is "about the mythology of America, and more generally, how cultures perceive each other".


Plot
The film begins with Uday (Prateik Babbar) leaving his village for the United States, telling his little brother Ramakant "Rama" (Suraj Sharma) to always remember what he tells him. While his mother is crying due to Uday's departure, Rama tells him to always write to the family when he gets to "Umrika" ("America" as spoken with an accent).
Following the death of his father, Rama realises that the letters his family has been receiving from Udai have been forged by his father and uncle, and learns that Udai vanished when he reached the port city of Mumbai. He embarks upon a journey to locate his brother.
Rama learns that his brother had been working as a barber in Mumbai in a rural area. Rama is devastated and decides to join the trafficking gang led by an underground gangster who demands 2 lakh rupees to take him to New York City. Rama did not hesitate once and gave 2 lakhs to the man. By that night of that day he was called at serine place to get picked up. He was then dropped off a port where he finds his brother was working as an assistant for the underground boss. He did not look at his brother and got up into a container with other girls and boys which naturally stated us it was a human trafficking container. In the climax the ship boarded for the New York city and camera pans to the back view of Uday who stares at the container ship sailing off on the huge ocean. After that the gangster came to him and said to return the loan of 2 lakhs he took from him.


Cast
Prateik Babbar as Udai
Suraj Sharma as Ramakant
Tony Revolori as Lalu
Adil Hussain as Patel
Sauraseni Maitra as Radhika
Nidhi Bisht as Pinky
Lin Laishram as Udai's Wife
Rajesh Tailang as Postman


Soundtrack

The soundtrack of Umrika consists of 17 tracks composed by Dustin O'Halloran.


Release
Shortly after its premiere, the film was sold by sales agent Beta Cinema to France, Germany, Austria, Australia, South Korea and numerous other territories, making it one of the most widely distributed Indian independent films of recent times that was, incidentally, never released in India. The film had its European premiere at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival, 2015.


Reception


Critical reception
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes Umrika has an approval score of 77% based on 13 reviews with an average rating of 6.4 out of 10. Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times called Umrika a "warmly intelligent film" and included it in his 25 Films of note at Sundance 2015. Dennis Harvey of Variety praised the film, giving kudos to "Nair’s soundly constructed script and deft handling of a very good cast." Boyd van Hoeij of The Hollywood Reporter stated Nair has managed to incorporate several big and abstract topics—including what ties us to our families and place of birth and the extent to which these things are important—into a story in which they become highly personal for the characters. Nikola Grozdanovic of IndieWire gave the film a rating of C− saying that, '"Umrika" is ultimately a non sequitur story that, at worst, holds no weight, and, at best, makes little sense to someone born outside of Indian values and traditions.' The New Zealand Herald gave the film a rating of 3.5 out of 5 and said that, "It's a sobering watch and an interesting, if not outstanding, film." Paul Byrnes of The Sydney Morning Herald gave the film a rating of 4 out of 5 saying that, "Umrika achieves remarkable power as a story by concentrating its view of America through the eyes of people who have never been there." Sharon Hurst of Cinephilia gave the film a rating of 4 out of 5 and said that, "Umrika captures the anomaly and paradox that is life in India. But it is also a finely wrought narrative that ticked enough boxes for it to be a crowd-pleasing winner of the Audience Award at Sundance 2015."


Awards
HP Briding The Borders Award. Palm Springs International Film Festival, 2016
FIPRESCI Critic's Prize. Cairo International Film Festival, 2015
(Nominated) Golden Pyramid Award. Cairo International Film Festival, 2015
Audience Award, World Cinema Dramatic Competition. Sundance Film Festival, 2015
(Nominated) Grand Jury Prize, World Cinema Dramatic Competition. Sundance Film Festival, 2015
Audience Award, Narrative Feature. CAAMFest, 2016


References


External links
Umrika on the Internet Movie Database

The Sydney School of Education and Social Work is a constituent body of the University of Sydney, Australia. In January 2003, the faculty was formed by the amalgamation of two schools from the former Faculty of Education with the School of Social Work and Policy Studies from the Faculty of Arts.


See also
Sydney University Education and Social Work Society
Sydney Teachers College


References


External links
University of Sydney Faculty of Education and Social Work

Doa Putra Ebal Johan "Utha" Likumahuwa (1 August 1955 – 13 September 2011) was an Indonesian singer from Ambon, Maluku.
He rose to fame in Indonesia in the 1980s with his album Nada & Apresiasi (1982) and the song "Tersiksa Lagi". His 1985 album Aku Pasti Datang was later ranked 75th in the 32nd Edition of the "150 Best Indonesian Albums" in Rolling Stone magazine.


Career
Likumahuwa started his career in the 1970s as the drummer of a rock band when living in Bandung. Afterwards, he joined a jazz-rock group which played frequently in Jakarta.
In 1982, he released his debut album Nada & Apresiasi. It became a success, enabling him to continue forward into the early 2000s.


Achievements
In 1989, he received the second best performance award at the 1989 ASEAN Pop Song Festival in Manila.
Likumahuwa's other achievements include second place in the Asia Pacific Singing Contest in Hong Kong (1989) and second place in the Asia Pacific Broadcasting Union/ABU Golden Kite World Song Festival in Kuala Lumpur (1990).


Personal life
Likumahuwa was married and has two children. After his career in entertainment, he was active in his community leading church services.


Death
Likumahuwa fell ill while on holiday in Pekanbaru on 26 June 2011. He was treated but suffered from a stroke shortly after, leaving him paralyzed on the right side of his body. He died on 13 September 2011 after a surgery to treat his paralysis.


References

V. R. Prabodhachandran Nayar (also spelled Prabodhachandran Nair), popularly known as VRP Nayar, is a Phonetics expert of Kerala. He is the pioneer in the study of the phonology of the Malayalam language. Apart from phonology, he is also interested in syntax and stylistics.


Professional career
VRP Nayar commenced his professional career in 1959 when he was 20, as a lecturer in Malayalam in the South Travancore Hindu College Nagercoil (Kanyakumari District, Tamil Nadu), the then southernmost college in India. He retired as Head of the department of Linguistics, University of Kerala, Trivandrum, in August 1998. However, he is active as a teacher and was working as a Visiting Professor-cum-Coordinator, at Department of Linguistics, Central University of Kerala, Kasaragod during the years 2012 and 2013.
Association with South Travancore Hindu College, helped him have exposure first to colloquial Tamil and in due course, to the classical language and literature in Tamil.
Concurrently he progressed with his PhD program as a part-time Research Scholar under the guidance of Dean Professor / Dr PK Narayana Pillai, in the Department of Oriental Studies, University of Kerala. He was the first recipient of University Grants Commission (India)'s’s Junior Research Fellowship in the Faculty of Oriental Studies in the University. In May 1963 he joined as the only Lecturer in the University's newly established Department of Linguistics and in 1965 submitted his PhD thesis entitled Descriptive Grammar of Krishnagatha, one of the oldest and classic poetic works by the legendary Malayalam poet Cherusseri Namboothiri. In 1967 Dr Nayar was granted a Commonwealth Scholarship for research in Phonetics and Linguistics at the School of Oriental and African Studies in the University of London. His studies in London overshot their stipulated aims, in the sense that he successfully completed another thesis called Malayalam Verbal Forms– A Phonetic and Phonological Study Supported by Experimental Findings which fetched him his second PhD. During this period of research he could make a study tour of a number of libraries and speech-laboratories in the UK as well as in France, the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany.
Rejoining his parent Department in Thiruvananthapuram, Dr Nayar was promoted as Reader and subsequently as Professor and in 1981 as Chair-Professor, which position he held till his retirement in 1998. Simultaneously he served on several occasions in the following positions also:   Member /  Chair, Board of Studies in Linguistics;  Member /  Dean of the Faculty of Oriental Studies; Director of the International Center for Kerala Studies;  Member of the Advisory Committee for the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library and the Department of Malayalam Lexicon; the first Vice-Chairman of the Council Monitoring the Choice – based Credit and Semester System, introduced for the first time in any University in Kerala.
During his tenure as Professor of Linguistics in the University of Kerala, Dr Nayar organized a number of Seminars, Symposiums, Conferences and Workshops at the regional, state and national levels and successfully completed several Research Projects.
After his retirement from the University of Kerala, Dr Nayar served the following institutions as a Visiting Professor and in various capacities as presented here:


Publications
Malayalam

Vivarthhanaththinte Bhaashaasaasthrabhuumika   (Translation -  Its Background Linguistics), State Institute of Languages, TVPM (SIL) 1974
Svanavijnjaanam (Phonetics), SIL, 1980
Lookabhaashakal (The World Languages)DC Books, 1987
Ezhuththinte katha (The Story of Writing or the Letter), The Institute of Children's Literature, TVPM 1996
Malayalam Malayaaliyolam (Malayalam as Much as the Malayaali) SIL, 1999
Cherusseri (A literary biography of the author of Krishnagatha), Department of Publications, University of Kerala, 1999
Uchchaaranam nannaavaan (For Improvement in Pronunciation) SIL 2000
Sailiibhamgikal (The Beauties of Style) SIL 2003
Hari Nama Keerthanam (Annotated edition of the famous 16th century hymn) Thunchan Smaraka Samithi, TVPM-9, 2009
Bhaashaasaasthradrshtiyiluute (From the View point of Linguistics), SIL 2009
Draavidabhaashakal (Dravidian Languages Translation from English of MS Andranov's original book in Russian)SIL 1975
Chittappetuththiya kathhakalippadangal (Notated Kathakali songs: An anthology of 20 select pieces with introduction and notes) Keralakalamandalam 2004
SriLalitasasahasranaamasthothramliteral explanation for Lalita Sahasranamam – (Annotated Edition with an introduction)Thunchan Smaaraka Samithi, TVPM-9, 2011
Bhashasatra Nighandu A thorough insight into the science of language, Kerala Bhasha Institute, TVPM,2012,
Malayalam Verbal Forms – Phonetics and Phonology of Colloquial Malayalam, with Experimental Findings, Dravidian Linguistics Association, TVPM 1972
Malayalam: A Linguistic Description, National Research Publications, Kazhakuttam TVPM 1973
Malayalam for Beginners, Swantham Books, TVPM-10; 1999
Kathakali Texts in Translation (in Phillip B Zarrilli: Kathakali-Dance Drama Where Gods and Demons Come to Play 2003)
Vidyarambham CD for Malayalam Self - Study (2001)
Vision, insights and Innovation (Report of the Calicut University Commission, 2000)
Malayalam for All India Service Officer Trainees, Dr. V.R. Prabodhachandran Nayar, Publisher: Institute of Management in Government(IMG), Thiruvananthapuram, 2020
Dr. K. Raghavan Pilla-a literary biography by Dr. VRP, State Institute of Languages, 2020
Lalitha Ganangal Prabodha sangeetham Valyam-2, National Bookstall, Kottayam 2021 March.
Prabodhasangeetam, by Dr. V R Prabodhachandran Nayar, Kurukshetra Prakasan, Kaloor Towers, Kochi, April, 2023
KATHAKALI, An Ocean of Possibilities, Heritage and Present Scenario, by Dr. V R Prabodhachandran Nayar, NYR Ventures, LLC, Burlingon,MA USA, 2025


Awards
Dr. K Godavarma Memorial Gold medal (1959)
Commonwealth Scholarship for post doctoral research at the School of Oriental and African Studies, Univ. of London (1967)
IC Chacko Award of the Kerala Sahitya Akademy, for the best book in scientific literature (Swanavijnaanam) (Citation) (1981)
CL Antony Award of the Trissur Sahridaya veedi (Citation) (1998)
MKKNayar Award of the MKKNayar Memorial Cultural Institute, Pakalkuri  (Citation) (2002)
NV Krishna Variar Award for scientific literature (2011)
Sakthi Thaayaatt Award for scientific literature (2011)
Professor CP Menon Award for scientific literature (Citation) (2013)
(Mukunda Raajaa) Smriti Puraskaaram of Keralakalamandalam 9 November 2014)
Shreshta Malayala Basha Puraskaram, Govt. of India, 4 April 2019.
Tapasya Kala-Sahitya Vedi's Prof. P Viswambharan Puraskaram, Dec. 2025
Prof. S. Guptan Nair Foundation's Puraskaram, Feb. 2026


See also
Dravidian Linguistics Association
Dravidian Languages


References

"www.getcited.com/mbrz/11124027". getcited.com. Retrieved 25 January 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: deprecated archival service (link)
Mallassery, S.R. (1994). Postpositions in a Dravidian Language: Transformational Analysis of Malayalam. Mittal Publications. ISBN 9788170995746. Retrieved 25 January 2017.

Venture capital in Israel refers to the financial capital provided to early-stage, high-potential, high risk, growth startup companies based in Israel. The country's venture capital industry was born in the mid-1980s and has rapidly developed. Israel currently has more than 276 active venture capital funds, of which 71 are international VCs with Israeli offices. Israel's venture capital and incubator industry plays an important role in the booming high-tech sector that has been given the nickname "Silicon Wadi", considered second in importance only to its Californian counterpart, the Silicon Valley.
According to the Israeli Research Center, IVC, Israeli tech exits in 2021 (M&As, buyouts, IPOs) totaled $22.2 billion from 238 deals.  Excluding deals over $5 billion, 2021 capital saw almost 50% from IPOs, while the number of M&As did not fall short compared to previous years.
According to a report from Start-Up Nation Central (SNC), the three largest earning sectors in Israel were Enterprise IT & Data Infrastructure (which raised just under $6b), Cybersecurity-dominated Security Technologies ($5.9b), and Fintech ($4.2b).
According to IVC, In 2021, venture capital investment in Israel stood at $25.6 billion – a leap of almost 150% from 2020.


History
Israel's venture capital industry was born in 1985, when the first Israeli venture capital fund, Athena Venture Partners, was founded by Major-General Dan Tolkowsky, the past Chief of Staff of the Israel Air Force; Dr. Gideon Tolkowsky; and Frederick R. Adler, a pillar of the US venture capital industry who had conceived the notion of taking Israeli High-tech companies public on NASDAQ. Subsequently, in 1990, Gideon Tolkowsky and Yadin Kaufmann founded Israel's second VC firm, "Veritas Venture Capital Management", whose main investors were Anglo American Corporation of South Africa and De Beers.
The success of the venture capital industry in Israel continued with Yozma (Hebrew for "initiative"), a government initiative in 1993 offering attractive tax incentives to foreign venture capital investments in Israel and promising to double any investment with funds from the government. One of the first VCs established was Israel Seed Partners, by Michael Eisenberg, Jonathan Medved and Neil Cohen. 
As a result of the government's efforts, Israel's annual venture capital outlays rose nearly 60-fold, from $58 million to $3.3 billion, between 1991 and 2000. The number of companies launched using Israeli venture funds rose from 100 to 800.  Israel's information technology revenues rose from $1.6 billion to $12.5 billion. By 1999, Israel ranked second only to the United States in invested private equity capital as a share of GDP.  It also led the world in the share of its growth attributable to high-tech ventures: 70 percent. According to the OECD, Israel is also ranked first in the world in expenditure on Research and Development (R&D) as a percentage of GDP.
Though Israel's venture capital industry played an important role in the high-tech sector, the 2008 financial crisis also affected the availability of venture capital locally. In 2009, there were 63 mergers and acquisitions in the Israeli market worth a total of $2.54 billion; 7% below 2008 levels ($2.74 billion), when 82 Israeli companies were merged or acquired, and 33% lower than 2007 proceeds ($3.79 billion) when 87 Israeli companies were merged or acquired.
In 2019, Israeli companies were considered more popular than their American peers. For comparison, investment volume in Israeli startups grew by 140% from 2014 to 2018. Investments in technological startups from the U.S. grew by 64%. Moreover, Israeli startups are becoming so attractive that US companies tend to acquire them more than anyone else: they account for half of all transactions in 2018. Thus, Israel eventually became a "net seller". In particular, artificial intelligence (AI) raises the most investments (17%) among all high technologies in Israel. The recent acquisition of Israeli company Mellanox for $6.9 billion by Nvidia Corporation is indicative. It was a definite contender for the largest M&A deal in 2019.


Characterization
Israel's venture capital industry has about 276 active venture capital funds, of which 71 are international VCs with Israeli offices. Additionally, there are some 220 international funds, including Polaris Venture Partners, Accel Partners, and Greylock Partners, that do not have branches in Israel but actively invest in Israel through an in-house specialist.
In 2009, the  Life Sciences Sector led the market with $272 million or 24% of total capital raised, followed by the Software Sector with $258 million or 23%, the Communications sector with $219 million or 20%, and the Internet sector with 13% of capital raised in 2009.


The unicorns era
Venture capitalist Aileen Lee coined the term "unicorn" in 2013 to define a privately held startup valued at $1 billion or more. It was initially used to portray the rarity of such companies. As of 2021, over 70 unicorns exist in Israel or were founded by Israelis – making Israel the number one country in the world in its number of unicorns per capita.
The first Israeli company to be named a unicorn was ironSource, reaching a value of $1.5 billion in 2014. Since then the rate of new Israeli unicorns has risen exponentially. From 2014 to 2018, the total number of new unicorns was 19 combined; 2019 had 12 new unicorns, and in 2020 a total of 14, whereas in 2021, there were an astonishing number of 28 companies, including Wiz, K-health, Verbit, Deel and Honey Book, a 200% increase compared to the previous year.
As a result, more foreign venture capital funds are currently invested in Israeli or Israeli-led unicorns, including Andreessen Horowitz, Spark Capital, Vertex Ventures, Insight Partners and corporate venture capital funds including Intel Capital, Microsoft Ventures (M12) and others.
In February 2026, the venture-backed drone technology startup XTEND achieved a public exit through a merger with the Nasdaq-listed JFB Construction Holdings, valuing the company at a "unicorn" valuation of $1.5 billion. Prior to this exit, XTEND had raised approximately $70 million in venture capital from prominent Israeli and international firms, including Protego Ventures, Aliya Capital, and TAU Ventures. The deal, which transition the company to a public listing under the ticker XTND, was supported by a $152 million investment from a consortium including Eric Trump and Unusual Machines.


Technological business incubators
In the early 1990s, the Israeli government created a technological business incubator program (Hebrew: חממה טכנולוגית) to leverage the strengths of approximately 750,000 scientists, engineers, and physicians who had just arrived from the former USSR. Israel's Office of the Chief Scientist (OCS), a division of the Ministry of Economy, started six incubators designed to foster seed and early-stage technology development through entrepreneurship. Today, there are 24 such incubators located throughout Israel, and 65 percent of the projects are science-related research and development.
In 2007, incubator companies raised $435 million in private funds, up 74 percent from 2006. Currently, the OCS allocates approximately $1 billion per year to incubators and other programs that encourage technology development


List of VC companies in Israel
Pitango Venture Capital
Genesis Partners
OurCrowd
Vertex Holdings
Hanaco Ventures
Viola Ventures (Shlomo Dovrat)
Jerusalem Venture Partners


See also
Economy of Israel
Science and technology in Israel
List of Israeli companies listed on the Nasdaq
List of Israeli inventions and discoveries
Start-up Nation


References


External links
Directory of venture capital funds in Israel
Venture capital in Israel at MFA.gov.il
Full list of Israeli unicorns in Tech Aviv Project

Vereen M. Bell (5 October 1911 – 26 October 1944) was an American novelist and naval officer who was killed in action during World War II.


Early life
Born in Cairo, Georgia, to Jennie Vereen and Judge Reason Chesnutt Bell, Vereen Bell attended public schools before graduating from the Davidson College in North Carolina in 1932.


Career
After writing several short stories and editing magazines, Bell wrote the novel Swamp Water, set in the Okefenokee Swamp. It was originally published in 1940 as a serial in the Saturday Evening Post. The novel was successfully adapted as a film (B&W) of the same title in 1941 and again as a color film, Lure of the Wilderness, in 1952.
Bell continued writing while serving in the Navy in World War II. In May 1944, he was observed pecking at a typewriter in a stateroom on his ship, the USS Gambier Bay (CVE-73). The working title of his last work was, The Renegade Queen.


Death
In World War II, Bell was a lieutenant assigned as an intelligence officer to Composite Squadron VC-10 aboard the USS Gambier Bay, an escort carrier. In the Battle off Samar, on 25 October 1944, the Gambier Bay was part of a task force attacked by Vice Admiral Takeo Kurita's "Center Force". Bell rushed to the ready room to put on his flying gear but was ordered by the VC-10 commander, Lt. Cdr. Edward Huxtable, to remain on board. Bell survived the sinking of the Gambier Bay that morning but succumbed to exposure and delirium sometime during the evening of the 26th.


Legacy
"Vereen Bell Highway" was named after Bell in Ware County, Georgia.
Davidson College now awards the Vereen Bell Award for creative writing in his honor.


References

short article and photo


Further reading
Vereen Bell, Brag Dog and Other Stories: The Best of Vereen Bell, Belgrade, Mont., Wilderness Adventures Press, 2000.
Alexander Sesonske, "Jean Renoir in Georgia: Swamp Water," Georgia Review 26 (Spring 1982), pp 24–66.

Vermilion Energy is an international energy producer based in Calgary, Canada. It has operations in North America, Europe and Australia. Vermilion is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange and the New York Stock Exchange.


History
Vermilion was founded in 1994 as a Canadian oil and gas exploration and production company focused on assets in Alberta, Canada. 
In 1997, Vermilion expanded internationally through the acquisition of oil-producing assets in France. Since 1997, Vermilion has continued to add assets to its portfolio with operations across North America, Europe and Australia. 
The company changed its status to that of a trust in December 2002 when it became known as Vermilion Energy Trust for eight years; in September 2010, it converted back to a corporation.
In 2004, Vermilion started to operate in the Netherlands. The following year in 2005, Vermilion completed an acquisition of 60% of the offshore Wandoo field and platform located on the northwest shelf of Australia. 
Vermilion acquired an 18.5% non-operating stake in the Corrib field in the Republic of Ireland from Marathon Oil in 2009, which grew to 20% along with operatorship when Royal Dutch Shell exited the project in 2018. In 2021, Vermilion acquired Equinor's 36.5% stake for $434 million (€382 million), increasing its share of the gas field to 56.5%.
In March 2013, Vermilion began trading on the NYSE under the ticker symbol "VET". Vermilion entered the US market with the acquisition of properties in the Powder River Basin of northeastern Wyoming in 2014. Vermilion acquired a 25% non-operated interest in four producing natural gas fields in Germany from GDF Suez in February 2014. Also that year, Vermilion was awarded its first concession in Hungary, representing Vermilion’s initial entry into Central and Eastern Europe.
In April 2018, Vermilion announced the acquisition of Spartan Energy, a Saskatchewan-focused light oil producer, for $1.4 billion. The following year, Vermilion drilled two successful natural gas wells in Croatia. 
The strategic acquisition of Leucrotta Exploration was announced on May 31, 2022, marking Vermilion’s entry into the prolific Montney resource play in Canada.
In February 2024, Vermilion Energy announced the acquisition of Westbrick Energy Ltd.


Operations
In Canada, Vermilion's operations are focused in the West Pembina region near Drayton Valley in Alberta, in the Peace River Arch in northeast British Columbia and northwest Alberta and the Northgate Region of southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba.
Vermilion's activities in the United States are targeting oil and gas development in the Turner Sands tight-oil play.
Vermilion has become the largest oil producer in France. In 2017, under a new climate change bill, Vermilion will no longer be an oil producer for France as of 2040. The company estimates there are more than 1.7 billion barrels of original oil in place in the five biggest conventional oil pools.
In the Netherlands, the company has undeveloped land base approximately 800,000 acres (3,200 km2). The Netherlands is characterized by high impact natural gas drilling and development. Vermilion's natural gas production in the Netherlands is priced of Title Transfer Facility (TTF).
In Germany, the company’s assets include four natural gas fields across 11 production licenses, covering 1,100,000 acres (4,500 km²) in the North German Basin.
Vermilion is the operator and minority owner of the Corrib gas project in Ireland. At peak production, the Corrib project has been projected to supply 60-65% of the country's natural gas demand and over 90% of the country's natural gas production. First-gas from Corrib began on 30 December 2015.
Wandoo is Vermilion's Australian asset, an offshore oil field and platform approximately 80 kilometres (50 mi) off the northwest coast of Australia. Wandoo production receives a premium to Brent Crude pricing. Vermilion originally purchased a 60% operated interest in Wandoo in 2005.  The company then purchased the remaining 40% interest in Wandoo in 2007.


See also
Canadian petroleum companies


References


External links
Official website

Vexillum taylorianum is a species of small sea snail, marine gastropod mollusk in the family Costellariidae, the ribbed miters.


Description
(original description) The mitre-shaped shell is spirally striated. The ribs are close. The whorls are rather convex. The body whorl is rib-banded with orange and brown. In a variety there are red lines between the bands. In the shape of the whorls it resembles Vexillum taeniatum (Lamarck, 1811), but the characters of the ribs and colouring prevent its association with that species.


References

Vyacheslav Aleksandrovich Skok (Russian: Вячеслав Александрович Скок, born 3 September 1946 in Rzhev) is a Russian water polo player, who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1968 Summer Olympics.


See also
List of Olympic medalists in water polo (men)


External links
Viacheslav Skok at Olympics.com
Viacheslav Skok at Olympedia
Viacheslav Skok at InterSportStats

Victor Mbarika is a Cameroonian Information and Communication Technology expert and academic based in the United States of American. He  is currently a professor of MIS and Stallings International Distinguished Scholar at East Carolina University in Greenville, North Carolina, United States. He is the President of Board of Trustees of the ICT University.


Education
Mbarika earned his Master's degree in Management Information Systems (MIS) from The University of Illinois at Chicago in 1997, and a Ph.D. in MIS from Auburn University in 2000.


Career and research
Mbarika's research is focused on ICT implementation in Africa and has developed a theoretical framework for understanding ICTs in less developed countries and understanding the contextual differences that dictate information systems research in less advantaged environments. He is founding editor-in-chief of The African Journal of Information Systems and senior board member for several academic journals.
He is the founder of the International Center for Information Technology and Development (ICITD), East Carolina University, Greenville, which focuses on IT training and development in e-health, e-education and e-democracy in Sub Saharan Africa.  Mbarika is a five-time Fulbright-MCMC research grants recipient.
He is facilitator of The ICT for Africa conference series (ICT4 Africa), the ICT University Foundation and Cameroon Youths for Jesus (CYJ).
In 2020, Premium Times reported that a spokesperson for Abdullahi Umar Ganduje, governor of Kano State of Nigeria, claimed that Ganduje had received a letter from Mbarika indicating Ganduje's appointment as a visiting professor at East Carolina University. The university later released a statement confirming Mbarika as its faculty member but denied offering the appointment stating that Mbarika acted on his own because he is not an authorized official to make such an appointment.


Honors and awards
African Achievers Award (2023) in London, United Kingdom for his "Outstanding contribution to computer science and telecommunications" and his "Contribution to ICT Research and Education"
President’s Lifetime Achievement Award by former U.S. President Joe Biden for his contributions to education and poverty alleviation.
The TEH-BENG (Pillar of Society) title by the Meta Fons Union in Yaoundé, Cameroon for his contributions to ICT development in the region.


Selected books
Ayo, C. K. and Mbarika, V. (Eds.). (2017). Sustainable ICT Adoption and Integration for Socio-Economic Development. IGI Global, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
Mbarika, V. and Adebayo, A. P. (2015). Information and Communication Technology for Secondary Schools. AGWECAMS Publishers.
Kituyi G., Moya, M. and Mbarika, V. (2013). Computerized Accounting and Finance: Applications in Business. Makerere University Business School.
Hinson, R., Boateng, R. and Mbarika, V. (Eds.). (2009). Electronic Commerce and Customer Management in Ghana. Accra, Ghana: Pro Write Publishing.
Kizza, J.M., Muhirwe, J., Aisbett, J., Getao, K., Mbarika, V., Patel, D. and Rodrigues, A. J. (Eds.). (2007). Strengthening the Role of ICT in Development. Fountain Publishers: Kampala, Uganda.
Sankar, C.S., Mbarika, V., & Raju, P.K. (2006). Use of Information Technologies in Businesses and Society: Learning Through Real-World Case Studies. Anderson, SC: Tavenner Publishers.
Raju, P.K., Sankar, C. & Mbarika, V. (2005). POWERTEL Case Study: Coverage of a Larger Area versus Better Frequency Re-Use in Wireless Communications. Anderson, SC: Tavenner Publishers.
Mbarika, V. (2001). Africa’s Least Developed Countries’ Teledensity Problems and Strategies. Yaounde, Cameroon: ME & Agwecam Publishers.


References


External links
ICITD

Violence: The Role-Playing Game of Egregious and Repulsive Bloodshed is a short, 32-page role-playing game written by Greg Costikyan under the pseudonym "Designer X" and was published by Hogshead Publishing in 1999 as part of its New Style line of games.


Gameplay
Violence is a satire of conventional dungeon-bashing games, set in a contemporary metropolis where the player characters dash from room to room killing the occupants and stealing their belongings. It is relentlessly user-hostile, taking time out to insult the reader wherever possible (it opens with the words, "Welcome to Violence, you degraded turd") and uses a system where the user can buy experience points for cash from the designer or publisher. The rule-set provides information on a range of things related to killing. Weapons, combat styles, and the like are intricately detailed.


Publication history
Violence (1999) was designed by Greg Costikyan (a.k.a. Designer X) and was published with cover art by Clint Langley in 1999 as one of the New Style role-playing games published by Hogshead Publishing, a series of experimental and alternative role-playing games that included The Extraordinary Adventures of Baron Munchausen, Pantheon, and Puppetland/Powerkill. 
In August 2005, Costikyan released Violence under a Creative Commons license, and made it available for download.
A Spanish language edition exists.


Reception
In his 2011 book Designers & Dragons, game historian Shannon Appelcline noted that Violence "was probably the least loved of the New Style games. Like Power Kill it was a largely social commentary. It used humor and satire to critique violence in role-playing games and was sufficiently biting that [game designer James] Wallis thought of it as a Modest Proposal for the role-playing game industry. Set in the modern day, Violence lets players do dungeon crawls into places like the homes of illegal immigrants, kill them and take their stuff. However, satire did not necessarily produce a playable role-playing game on its own."
In his 2023 book Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground, RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, "The book is grotesque, sneering, and snide, explicitly calling itself disgusting and questioning the moral fiber of anyone willing to read it. It's often quite funny but also gets at a deep frustration regarding the centering of violence in all sorts of play — tabletop games, videogames, make believe.


References


External links
Costikyan, Greg (20 August 2005). "Violence to Creative Commons". Games * Design * Art # Culture. Archived from the original (http) on 8 January 2006. Retrieved 10 January 2006.
Load Up On Guns, Bring Your Friends Archived 20 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine, a game scenario for Violence by Jody Macgregor (Critical Miss, issue 10).
Violence (PDF download, costik.com)

WSKG may refer to:

WSKG-FM, a radio station (89.3 FM) licensed to Binghamton, New York, United States
WSKG-TV, a television station (channel 31, virtual 46) licensed to Binghamton, New York, United States
WSKG Public Telecommunications Council, the owner of WSKG-FM and WSKG-TV

Waddingtons was a British manufacturer of card and board games. The company was founded by John Waddington of Leeds, England and the manager, actor and playwright Wilson Barrett, under the name Waddingtons Limited.  The name was changed in 1905 to John Waddington Limited, then Waddington's House of Games, then Waddington Games, and finally just Waddingtons.


Founding and history
The company was established as a printing business, and at first 'practically all its business related to the theatre'. It entered into game production in 1922, due to a boom in demand for playing cards around World War I. Waddingtons subsequently sold both original games (especially tie-ins for UK television programmes) and games licensed from other publishers.
Waddingtons became the UK publisher of the US Parker Brothers' Monopoly, while Parker licensed Waddingtons' Cluedo. In 1941, the British Directorate of Military Intelligence section 9 (MI9) had the company create a special edition of Monopoly for World War II prisoners of war held by the Germans. 
Hidden inside these games were maps, compasses, real money and other objects useful for escaping. They were distributed to prisoners by fake charitable organisations. In 2024, an immersive, life-sized monopoly was created in Leeds in honor of Waddingtons.
Victor Watson, the grandson of Victor Hugo Watson was its chairman from 1977 to 1993. While well known for games, they never provided more than 15% of profit; Victor continued his father Norman's emphasis on improving packaging technology, such as folding cartons and microwave trays. From the 1970s, the popularity of video games hurt game sales, and after Victor's retirement, the company was bought by Hasbro in 1994.
Beginning in 1994, Christmas-themed jigsaw puzzles were released annually until 2007. The first twelve in the series depicted a scene from a Victorian-era Christmas. The final puzzle depicted a scene from the fairy tale Cinderella. The small number of puzzles, combined with them being limited editions, has made these puzzles highly collectable. Further jigsaws have been produced since 2010 by a new company, using the same brand name.


Games
Among the games published by Waddingtons were:


References


External links
Waddingtons Games   at BoardGameGeek
Waddingtons Playing Cards - a Brief history
Waddingtons Board Game Archive

Wairepo Kettleholes Conservation Area is a protected area near Omarama, in the Waitaki District and Canterbury Region of New Zealand's South Island.
The area is managed by the New Zealand Department of Conservation.


Geography
The area covers 420 hectares (1,000 acres) around the Wairepo kettleholes, depressions formed and remaining after the most recent retreat of glaciers in the area.  The kettleholes form ephemeral small lakes and a wetland area after sufficient precipitation and are surrounded by drought-tolerant low growing vegetation typical of the Mackenzie Basin.


History
The conservation area was established in 2004 when Glen Eyrie Downs Station completed a tenure review process.


References

Walter Burley Griffin (November 24, 1876 – February 11, 1937) was an American architect and landscape architect. He designed Canberra, Australia's capital city,  the New South Wales towns of Griffith and Leeton, and (with his wife) the Sydney suburb of Castlecrag.
Influenced by the Chicago-based Prairie School, Griffin developed a unique modern style in partnership with his wife Marion Mahony Griffin. In 28 years they designed over 350 buildings, landscape and urban-design projects as well as designing construction materials, interiors, furniture and other household items.


Early life
Griffin was born on November 24, 1876, 1876 in Maywood, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. He was the eldest of the four children of George Walter Griffin, an insurance agent, and Estelle Burley Griffin. His family moved to Oak Park and later to Elmhurst. As a boy, he had an interest in landscape design and gardening, and his parents allowed him to landscape the yard at their new home in Elmhurst. Griffin attended Oak Park High School. He considered studying landscape design but was advised by the landscape gardener O. C. Simonds to pursue a more lucrative profession.
Griffin chose to study architecture, and, in 1899, completed his bachelor's degree in architecture at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. The University of Illinois program was run by Nathan Clifford Ricker, a German-educated architect, who emphasized the technical aspects of architecture. During his studies, he also took courses in horticulture and forestry.


Chicago career

After his studies, Griffin moved to Chicago and was employed as a draftsman for two years in the offices of progressive architects Dwight H. Perkins, Robert C. Spencer Jr., and H. Webster Tomlinson in "Steinway Hall". Griffin's employers worked in the distinctive Prairie School style. This style is marked by horizontal lines, flat roofs with broad overhanging eaves, solid construction, craftsmanship, and strict discipline in the use of ornament. Louis Sullivan was influential among Prairie School architects and Griffin was an admirer of his work, and of his philosophy of architecture which stressed that design should be free of historical precedent. Other architects of that school include George Grant Elmslie, George Washington Maher, William Gray Purcell, William Drummond and most importantly, Frank Lloyd Wright.
In July 1901, Griffin passed the new Illinois architects' licensing examination and this permitted him to enter private practice as an architect. He began working in Frank Lloyd Wright's famous Oak Park, Illinois, studios. Although he was never made a partner, Griffin oversaw the construction on many of Wright's noted houses including the Willits House in 1902 and the Larkin Administration Building built in 1904. From 1905 he also began to supply landscape plans for Wright's buildings. Wright allowed Griffin and his other staff to undertake small commissions of their own. The William Emery house, built in Elmhurst, Illinois, in 1903 was such a commission. While working for Wright, Griffin fell in love with Mr. Wright's sister, Maginel Wright. He proposed marriage to her, but his affections for her were not returned, and she refused.
In 1906, he resigned his position at Wright's studio and established his own practice at Steinway Hall. Griffin and Wright had fallen out over events following Mr. Wright's trip to Japan in 1905. While Wright was away for five months, Griffin ran the practice. When Wright returned, he told Griffin that he had overstepped his responsibilities, completing several of Wright's jobs, and sometimes substituting his own building designs. Further, Wright had borrowed money from Griffin to pay for his travels abroad, and then he tried to pay off his debts to Griffin with prints he had acquired in Japan. It became clear to Griffin then that Wright would not make Griffin a partner in his business.
Griffin's first independent commission was a landscape design for the State Normal School at Charleston, Illinois, that became Eastern Illinois University. In the fall of 1906, he received his first residential job from Harry Peters. The Peters' House was the first house designed with an L-shaped or open floor plan. The L-shape was an economical design and easily constructed. From 1907 to 1914, several houses designed by Griffin were built on the far southwest side of Chicago in the city's Beverly and Morgan Park, Chicago neighborhoods. In 1981, the city of Chicago granted landmark status to 13 of these Prairie-style bungalows in Beverly along the 1700 block of West 104th Place, 12 blocks of Longwood Drive between West 98th and 110th Streets, and three blocks of Seeley Avenue. With seven of these houses being located on West 104th Place—comprising the largest concentration of original prairie style homes built in Chicago—the street as it runs between Hale Avenue on the west to Prospect Avenue on the east was designated the Griffin Place Historic District, which comprises a part of the larger Ridge Historic District.
In 1911, Griffin developed 'Solid Rock' house for William F. Tempel in Winnetka, Illinois. It was the first house built by Griffin in his mature style and of reinforced concrete.

On June 29, 1911, Griffin married Marion Lucy Mahony, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in architecture. She was employed first in Wright's office, and then by Hermann V. von Holst, who had taken over Wright's work in America when Wright left for Europe in 1909. Marion Mahony recommended to von Holst that he hire Griffin to develop a landscape plan for the area surrounding the three houses on Millikin Place for which Wright had been hired in Decatur, Illinois. Mahony and Griffin worked closely on the Decatur project immediately before their marriage.
After their marriage, Mahony went to work in Griffin's practice. A housing development with several homes designed by Griffin and Mahony, Rock Crest – Rock Glen in Mason City, Iowa, is seen as their most dramatic American design development of the decade and remains the largest collection of Prairie Style homes surrounding a natural setting.
From 1899 to 1914, Griffin created more than 130 designs in his Chicago office for buildings, urban plans and landscapes; half of these were built in the mid-western states of Illinois, Iowa, Michigan and Wisconsin.
The relationship between Griffin and Frank Lloyd Wright cooled in the years following Griffin's departure from Wright's firm in 1906. With Walter and Marion's wedding, Wright started to feel they were "against him". After the Griffins' win in the Australian federal capital design competition, and resultant front-page coverage in The New York Times, Wright and Griffin never spoke to each other again. In later years, whenever Griffin was brought up in conversation Wright would downplay his achievements and refer to him as a draftsman.


Canberra

In April 1911, the Australian Commonwealth Government held an international competition to produce a design for its new, as yet unnamed, federal capital city. Griffin produced a design with impressive renderings of the plan by his new wife. They first heard about the competition in July, while on honeymoon, and worked feverishly to prepare the plans. On May 23, 1912, Griffin's design was selected as the winner from among 137 entries. This created significant press coverage at the time and brought him professional and public recognition. Of his plan, he famously remarked:

I have planned a city that is not like any other in the world. I have planned it not in a way that I expected any government authorities in the world would accept. I have planned an ideal city – a city that meets my ideal of the city of the future.
In 1913, Griffin was invited by the Commonwealth Government to Australia to inspect the site that was to become Canberra. He left Mahony Griffin in charge of the practice and travelled to Australia in July. His letters reveal his appreciation for the Australian landscape. The Griffins joined the Naturalists Society of New South Wales in 1914, where they enjoyed organized bush walks and field studies. The society facilitated their contact with the Australian scientific community, especially botanists. This appreciation for Australian flora was reflected in Griffin's 1914 town plan for the town of Leeton in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area of New South Wales, and later in a design for Newman College at the University of Melbourne. He also used Australian flora botanical names as places names for suburbs and streets in Canberra, such as Grevillea Park, Telopea Park, Clienthus Circle and Blandfordia.
Griffin was offered the position of head of the department of architecture at the University of Illinois. At the same time he was negotiating a three-year contract with the Commonwealth Government to remain in Australia and oversee the implementation of his plan, which he felt had already been compromised. In October 1913, he was appointed the Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction. In this role, Griffin oversaw the design of North and South Canberra, though he struggled with considerable political and bureaucratic obstacles. In May 1914, he and his wife left America for Australia along with architects Roy Lippincott and George Elgh.
With the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Griffin was under pressure to reduce the scope and scale of his plans due to the diversion of funds towards the war effort. Several parts of his basic design underwent change. Plans to create Westbourne, Southbourne and Eastbourne Avenues to complement Canberra's Northbourne Avenue were eliminated, as was a proposed railway connecting South Canberra to North Canberra, and on to Yass, 35 mi (55 km) away. A market area that would have been at Russell Hill in North Canberra was moved south to  Fyshwick, next to South Canberra.
The pace of building was slower than expected, partly because of a lack of funds and partly because of continued disputation between Griffin and Commonwealth Government bureaucrats. Many of Griffin's design ideas were attacked by both the architectural profession and the press. In 1917, a Royal Commission determined that they had undermined Griffin's authority by supplying him with false data which he had used to carry out his work. Ultimately, Griffin resigned from the Canberra design project in December 1920 when he discovered that several of these bureaucrats had been appointed to an agency that would oversee Canberra's construction. The Commonwealth Government under the leadership of Prime Minister Hughes had removed Griffin as Director of Design and Construction after disagreements over his supervisory role, and in 1921 it created the Federal Capital Advisory Committee, with John Sulman as chair. Griffin was offered membership, but declined and withdrew from further activity in Canberra.
Griffin designed several buildings for Canberra, none of which was built. The grave of General Bridges on Mount Pleasant was the only permanent structure designed by him to be built in Canberra.
Aside from the city's design, Griffin's longest-living legacy is the plantation of Redwood trees (Sequoia sempervirens and Sequoiadendron giganteum) known as Pialligo Redwood Forest, that he and arborist Thomas Charles Weston planted in 1918. It is on Pialligo Avenue between Canberra and Queanbeyan, 1.8 mi (2.8 km) east of Canberra airport.


Later career

The Griffins' office in Chicago closed in 1917; however, they had successful practices in Melbourne and Sydney, which were a strong motivation for their continuing to live in Australia. The Griffins had received commissions for work outside Canberra since Walter first arrived in the country in 1913, designing town plans, subdivisions, and one of his highly regarded buildings, Newman College, the Catholic residential college of the University of Melbourne while employed in Canberra. While supervising activities in Canberra, Griffin spent much time in Melbourne and, in 1918, became a founder, with Royden Powell, of the Henry George Club, an organization devoted to providing a home for the Single Tax movement. The Griffins' first major commission after leaving Canberra was the Capitol Theatre in Melbourne; it opened on November 7, 1924. In 1964 architectural writer Robin Boyd described the Capitol as "the best cinema that was ever built or is ever likely to be built".
In 1916 and 1917, Griffin developed a patented modular concrete construction system known as "Knitlock" for use in the construction of Canberra. No Knitlock buildings were ever built in Canberra, although several were built in Australia. The first were built on Griffin's property in Frankston in 1922, where he constructed two holiday houses called "Gumnuts". The best examples of Knitlock include the S.R. Salter House in Toorak and the Paling House. Frank Lloyd Wright designed a similar system and used Griffin's design to support the arguments for his design.

In 1919, the Griffins founded the Greater Sydney Development Association (GSDA), and in 1921 purchased 259 ha of land in North Sydney. The GSDA's goal was the development of an idyllic community with a consistent architectural feel and bushland setting. Walter Burley Griffin as managing director of the GSDA designed all the buildings built in the area until 1935. Castlecrag was the first suburb to be developed by the GSDA. The Redding House and several others in Castelcrag were also built in Knitlock. Almost all the houses Griffin designed in Castlecrag were small and had flat roofs, and he included an internal courtyard in many of them. Griffin used what was at that time the novel concept of including native bushland in these designs. He came to be referred to as "The Wizard of Castlecrag".
Other work the Griffins did during this time included the Melbourne subdivisions of Glenard (where the Griffins built their own Knitlock house "Pholiota") and Mount Eagle at Eaglemont, and the Ranelagh Estate in Mount Eliza Victoria 1924. The Ranelagh Estate was listed on the Victorian State Heritage Register (H01605) in 2005 as a significant example of a country estate. Prior to 1920 the Griffins also designed the New South Wales towns of Leeton and Griffith. Griffin and architect J Burcham Clamp designed a large tomb built at Waverley Cemetery, Sydney, between 1914 and 1916 for James Stuart, which still stands as a good example of Griffin's sense of 'human-scale monumentality'.
The Griffins participated in the celebrated Chicago Tribune Tower Competition in 1922. Having won one international competition, as architects who were both well acquainted with Chicago and recognized as practical visionaries, they offered a solution that was positive, forward-looking and elegant. Indeed, their non-winning entry appears to have been about a decade ahead of its time, with emphatic verticality along the lines of the Art Deco or Art Moderne. It anticipated, and would have been a near neighbor of, Chicago's 333 North Michigan by Holabird & Roche (1928); with stylistic echos in John and Donald Parkinson's Bullocks Wilshire, in Los Angeles (1929), as well as Adah Robinson and Bruce Goff's Boston Avenue Methodist Church, Tulsa (1929).
In the 1920s, the Griffins prepared plans for the Milleara Estate (also known as City View) at Avondale Heights and the Ranelagh Estate at Mount Eliza, both in Victoria (Australia) in conjunction with surveyors Tuxen and Miller.


Incinerators
During the financial hardship of the Great Depression, in the 1930s Griffin designed incinerators, collaborating with the Reverberatory Incinerator and Engineering Company (RIECo), in conjunction with his friend and business partner, Eric Nicholls. He was responsible for twelve incinerator designs between 1930 and 1938, of which seven still survive. They are located at:
Willoughby, New South Wales
Glebe, New South Wales
Ipswich, Queensland
Essendon, Victoria
Hindmarsh, South Australia
Thebarton, South Australia
Canberra, Australian Capital Territory
The Willoughby incinerator is a good example of this work. It has been listed by the National Trust of Australia and the Royal Australian Institute of Architects as a building of significance. In 1999 it was listed in the New South Wales State Heritage Register. It has since been restored and converted to commercial use by Willoughby Council.
The Walter Burley Griffin Incinerator, Ipswich, Queensland is listed on the Queensland Heritage Register and has been converted into a theatre. Another incinerator was built in the suburb of Pyrmont, not far from the centre of Sydney. This incinerator was considered for heritage listing but was demolished in 1992 because it was in irredeemably bad condition.  


India
During their time at the GSDA, the Griffins became more involved in anthroposophy, and in 1935 through contacts in the movement Griffin won a commission to design the library at the University of Lucknow in Lucknow, India.
Although he had planned to stay in India only to complete the drawings for the library, he soon received more than 40 commissions, including the University of Lucknow Student Union building; a museum and library for the Raja of Mahmudabad; a zenana (women's quarters) for the Raja of Jahangirabad; Pioneer Press building, a bank, municipal offices, many private houses, and a memorial to King George V. He also won complete design responsibility for the 1936–1937 United Provinces Exhibition of Industry and Agriculture. His 53 projects for the 160-acre (0.65 km2) site featured a stadium, arena, mosque, imambara, art gallery, restaurant, bazaar, pavilions, rotundas, arcades, and towers, however, only part of his elaborate plans were fully executed.
Griffin was inspired by the architecture and culture of India, modifying forms as "he sought to create a modern Indian architecture ... Griffin was able to expand his aesthetic vocabulary to create an exuberant, expressive architecture reflecting both the 'stamp of the place' and the 'spirit of the times'". While in India, Griffin also published numerous articles for the Pioneer, writing about architecture, in particular about ventilation design improvements. Marion joined Walter in Lucknow in April 1936 to collaborate on several projects.


Death and burial in India
Griffin died of peritonitis in early 1937, five days after gall bladder surgery at King George's Hospital, Lucknow, in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, and was buried in Christian Cemetery in Lucknow. Marion Mahony Griffin oversaw the completion of the Pioneer Building that he had been working on at the time of his death. She closed down their Indian offices before leaving their Australian practice in the hands of Griffin's partner, Eric Milton Nicholls, and returned to Chicago.


Legacy

Griffin was largely under-appreciated during his time in Australia, but, since his death, recognition of his work has steadily grown. In 1964, when Canberra's central lake was filled, as Griffin had intended, Prime Minister Robert Menzies declined to have the lake named after himself. Instead he named it Lake Burley Griffin, making it the first "monument" in Canberra dedicated to the city's designer ("Burley" was included in the name because of the ongoing misconception that it was part of Griffin's surname). Burley Griffin Way is a 276 km road linking Griffith, Temora, Harden, and Binalong to the Hume highway west of Bowning, 10 km northwest of Yass.
Architectural drawings and other archival materials by and about the Griffins are held by numerous institutions in the United States, including the Drawings and Archives Department of Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University; the Block Gallery at Northwestern University; the Ryerson & Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago; and the New York Historical Society, as well as in several repositories in Australia, including the National Library of Australia, National Archives of Australia, and the Newman College Archives of the University of Melbourne. At the centenary of the Griffins' design work for Canberra, some believe they are owed a permanent memorial.


Recognition
In 1988 the Royal Australian Institute of Architects named its national Civic Design Award after Griffin. It is now known as the Walter Burley Griffin Award for Urban Design and is awarded annually.


In his own words
"I am what may be termed a naturalist in architecture. I do not believe in any school of architecture. I believe in architecture that is the logical outgrowth of the environment in which the building in mind is to be located".
From The New York Times, Sunday June 2, 1912


Major works


India
Library in University of Lucknow, in Lucknow city in the state of Uttar Pradesh in India
Dr Bhatia's Residence, still extant in Lucknow city in the state of Uttar Pradesh in India


United States
G.B. Cooley House, 1908 South Grand St., Monroe, Louisiana
Alfred W. Hebert House Remodeling, 1902, Evanston, Illinois
W.H. Emery House, 1903, Elmhurst, Illinois
Adolph Mueller House, 1906
John Dickinson House (part of the Eden Rift Estate Winery), 10034 Cienega Road Hollister, California 1906
Mary H. Bovee Apartment, 1907
John Gauler House, 5917–5921 N. Magnolia Ave., Chicago, Illinois, 1908
William S. Orth House, 1908, Winnetka, Illinois
Edmund C. Garrity House, 1909
Ralph Griffin House, 1909, Edwardsville, Illinois
Edmund C. Garrity House, 1712 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1909
William B. Sloan House, 1910
Frank N. Olmstead House, 1624 W. 100th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1910
Harry N. Tolles House, 10561 S. Longwood Drive, Chicago, Illinois, 1911
Harry G. Van Nostrand House, 1666 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1911
Russell L. Blount House I, 1724 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1911
Benjamin J. and Mabel T. Ricker House, 1510 Broad Street, Grinnell, Iowa, 1911–1912
Joshua Melson House, 1912, Mason City, Iowa
Russel L. Blount House II, 1950 W. 102nd Street, Chicago, Illinois, 1912–1913
Jenkinson House, 1727 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1912–1913
Walter D. Salmon House, 1736 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1912–1913
Newland House, 1737 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, 1913
Ida E. Williams House, W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois (based on the Von Nostrand plans, built by Blount), 1913
William R. Hornbaker House, 1710 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, (based on the Von Nostrand plans, built by Blount), 1914
James Frederic Clarke House, 1731 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, (based on the Von Nostrand plans, built by Blount), 1913
Harry C. Furneaux House, 1741 W. 104th Place, Chicago, Illinois, (based on the Salmon House plans, built by Blount), 1913
James Blyth House, Mason City, Iowa
Stinson Memorial Library, Anna, Illinois


Australia
Canberra plan, 1914–1920
Leeton town plan, 1914
Griffith town plan, 1914
Eaglemont town plan, 1915
Paris Theatre, Sydney, 1915 (demolished 1981)
Newman College, University of Melbourne, 1916–1918
Café Australia, Melbourne, 1916
North Arm Cove town plan, 1918
Pholiota, in Eaglemont, Victoria 1920
Capitol Theatre, Melbourne 1924
Palais de danse, St Kilda 1925 (destroyed by fire)
Leonard House, Elizabeth Street Melbourne 1925 (demolished)
Ranelagh Estate, town plan, 1924
Langi Flats, Toorak 1925–26
Castlecrag, suburb plan, 1925
Fishwick House, completed in 1929
Lake Daylesford, completed 1929
Castle Cove, suburb plan, 1930
Willoughby Incinerator, completed 1932
Duncan House (Castlecrag), completed 1934
Eric Pratten House, in Pymble, Sydney, completed 1936
Hindmarsh Incinerator, South Australia, completed 1936
Pyrmont Incinerator, completed 1936 (demolished 1992)
Thebarton Incinerator, South Australia, completed 1937
Walter Burley Griffin Incinerator, Ipswich, completed 1992
Glebe Incinerator, Blackwattle Bay, Sydney, built 1932


Gallery


References


Citations


Works cited
Griffin, Marion Mahony; Griffin, Walter Burley (1998). Beyond Architecture: Marion Mahony and Walter Burley Griffin : America, Australia, India. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-1-86317-068-0. OCLC 40398084.
Solomonson, Katherine (2003). The Chicago Tribune Tower Competition: Skyscraper Design and Cultural Change in the 1920s. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-76800-7.


General references
Birrell, James. 1964. Walter Burley Griffin. University of Queensland Press
Gebhard, David & Gerald Mansheim, Buildings of Iowa, Oxford University Press, New York, 1993
Gebhard, David. "The Suburban House and the Automobile." The Car and the city: The Automobile, the Built Environment and Daily Urban Life. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1991: 106,123.
Griffin, Dustin, ed., The Writings of Walter Burley Griffin (Cambridge University Press, Melbourne, 2008).

Kruty, Paul. 2000. Griffin, Walter Burley. American National Biography Online. Oxford University Press
MacMahon, Bill (2001). The Architecture of East Australia. Edition Axel Menges. ISBN 3-930698-90-0.
Mason City Iowa, An Architectural Heritage, Department of Community Development, City of Mason, Iowa, 1977
Maldre, Mati and Paul Kruty, Walter Burley Griffin in America, University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1996
McGregor, Alasdair, 'Grand Obsessions: The life and work of Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin, Penguin/Lantern, Camberwell, Victoria, 2009
Walker, M., Kabos, A. and Weirick, J. (1994) Building for nature : Walter Burley Griffin and Castlecrag, Castlecrag, N.S.W. : Walter Burley Griffin Society (ISBN 0-646-18133-5)
Wilson, Richard Guy and Sidney K. Robinson, The Prairie School in Iowa, Iowa State University Press, Ames, 1977


Further reading
Brooks, H. Allen, Frank Lloyd Wright and the Prairie School, Braziller (in association with the Cooper-Hewitt Museum), New York 1984; ISBN 0-8076-1084-4
Brooks, H. Allen, The Prairie School, W.W. Norton, New York 2006;  ISBN 0-393-73191-X
Brooks, H. Allen (editor), Prairie School Architecture: Studies from "The Western Architect", University of Toronto Press, Toronto, Buffalo 1975;  ISBN 0-8020-2138-7
Brooks, H. Allen, The Prairie School: Frank Lloyd Wright and his Midwest Contemporaries, University of Toronto Press, Toronto 1972;  ISBN 0-8020-5251-7
Griffin, Dustin (editor), The Writings of Walter Burley Griffin, Cambridge University Press, Melbourne 2008; ISBN 978-0-521-89713-6
[Move this book from "Further Reading" to "General References."

Townsend, Danielle, ed. (December 2008). "Walter Burley Griffin Lodge". Australian Period Style (3). Universal Magazines: 80–85. ISSN 1441-5259.
Page, Walter Hines; Page, Arthur Wilson (July 1914). "The March of the Cities: A Young American Architect Building A New Capital For Australia". The World's Work: A History of Our Time. XLIV (2): 351–352. Retrieved August 4, 2009.
McGregor, Alasdair, 'Grand Obsessions: The life and work of Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin', Penguin/Lantern, Camberwell, Victoria, 2009 ISBN 978-1-920989-38-5
Turnbull, J. and Navaretti, P. (eds), The Griffins in Australia and India: the complete works of Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin, Miegunyah Press, Melbourne 1998; ISBN 0-5228-4830-3


External links

Walter Burley Griffin Society (Australia) Archived May 21, 2019, at the Wayback Machine
Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin architectural drawings, circa 1909–1937.Held by the Department of Drawings & Archives, Avery Architectural & Fine Arts Library, Columbia University.
The Griffin Legacy, National Capital Authority
Imagining Canberra in Chicago from the ABC
Reading the past in the Walter Burley Griffin Incinerator and Fishwick House at Willoughby, NSW (educational resources)
Castlecrag Progress Association
"Paris Theatre". Dictionary of Sydney. Dictionary of Sydney Trust. 2008. Retrieved October 11, 2015.[CC-By-SA]
Great Buildings Online: works of Walter Burley Griffin (includes links to W.H. Emery House, 1903; Ralph Griffin House, 1909; Adolph Mueller House, 1906; Joshua Melson House, 1912; and Stinson Memorial Library, 1913)
Walter Burley Giffiin, The Prairie School of Architecture
Stinson Memorial Public Library (includes history of Stinson Library construction)
The Walter Burley Griffin Society of America
Mary Mahoney Griffin's Manuscript, The Magic of America: Ryerson & Burnham Libraries: Archives Collection
Walter Burley Griffin at Find a Grave
National Library of Australia:

Eric Milton Nicholls collection
Papers of Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony collected by Eric Nicholls, 1900–1947
The Donald Leslie Johnson collection of Walter and Marion Griffin documents, 1901–1988
The work of Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin in Melbourne, 1975 a collection of photographs by Wolfgang Sievers of works by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin taken in 1975


Online exhibitions
Walter Burley Griffin: in his own right, Public Broadcasting Service
An Ideal City? The 1912 Competition to Design Canberra an online exhibition developed by the National Archives of Australia, National Library of Australia and the National Capital Authority

Walter R. Roberts (August 26, 1916 – June 29, 2014) was an American writer, lecturer, and former government official.


Life and career
Walter R Roberts was born in Austria, and was educated at the University of Vienna and Cambridge University (M.Litt., Ph.D.).
He was a research assistant at The Harvard Law School (1940–1942) and joined the US Government (Coordinator of Information) in 1942. After eight years of service with the Voice of America, he was transferred to the Austrian Desk of the Department of State (1950).
In 1953, he was appointed Deputy Area Director for Europe in the newly created U.S. Information Agency (USIA). In 1955, he was a member of the American Delegation to the Austrian Treaty Talks that culminated in a State Treaty, signed in Vienna by the four occupying powers (U.S. Great Britain, France and the Soviet Union) on May 15, 1955.
In 1960, he was appointed Counselor for Public Affairs at the American Embassy in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. In 1966, he was assigned as Diplomat in Residence at Brown University in Providence, R.I. and in 1967 he was transferred to Geneva, Switzerland to serve as Counselor for Public Affairs at the U.S. Mission to the United Nations. In 1969, he was appointed Deputy Associate Director of USIA and in 1971 was elevated to the associate director position, then the senior career post in USIA.
In 1973, his book Tito, Mihailović and the Allies, 1941–1945 was published, described by Foreign Affairs as "the best book on the subject." In 1974, he received the Distinguished Honor Award from USIA. He retired from the U.S. Government in 1974 to take the position of Director of Diplomatic Studies at Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS). His first assignment there was to serve as executive director of a panel on International Information, Educational and Cultural Affairs (also called the Stanton Panel after its chairman, the then President of CBS, Dr. Frank Stanton).
In 1975, he was called back into government to serve as executive director of the Board for International Broadcasting.  (BIB, the government agency overseeing Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.  The BIB was dissolved and replaced in 1999 by the Broadcasting Board of Governors. In 1985, he retired for the second time from the U.S. Government and was appointed diplomat-in-residence at The George Washington University where he taught a course on "Diplomacy in the Information Age" for ten years.
In 1991, President George H. W. Bush appointed him to be a member of the U.S. Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy and President Bill Clinton reappointed him in 1994.  In 1993, he accepted an appointment as a member of the board of the Salzburg Global Seminar. In 2001, he co-founded (as a successor to the Public Diplomacy Foundation) The Institute for Public Diplomacy and Global Communication and the Public Diplomacy Council. He was later an advisor to the (renamed) Institute for Public Diplomacy and Global Communication and was a member emeritus of the board of the Public Diplomacy Council.
In 2009, he received the Voice of America "Director's Special Recognition Award".
In 2014, his book "Tito, Mihailović and the Allies, 1941 – 1945" was republished in Serbia. After his personal recollections about Josip Broz Tito were published by American Diplomacy, the Serbian newspaper Politika covered the story on its front page.
After his retirement from government, he wrote and spoke widely on foreign affairs subjects.
He died in 2014 in Washington D.C.


Books
Tito, Mihailović and the Allies,1941–1945, Rutgers University Press, 1973; reprinted  by Duke University Press, 1987
Culture and Information: Two Foreign Policy Functions (with Terry L. Deibel), Sage Publications, 1976.


Articles
"U.S. Experience in Evaluating Information Programs", Zeitschrift für Kulturaustausch,  Stuttgart, 1975
"The Global Information Revolution and the Communist World" (with Harold E. Engle), The Washington Quarterly,  Spring, 1986
"The Information Revolution: A Breakthrough in the East?"  The World Today (The Royal Institute of International Affairs), June 1989. Published in German by the Europaische Rundschau in the Fall of 1989.
"A New Status for Eastern Europe?", The World Today (The Royal Institute of International Affairs), October, 1989
"Germany: The Gorbachev Memorandum", The World Today (The Royal Institute of International Affairs), October, 1990
"Diplomacy in the Information Age", The World Today (The Royal Institute of International Affairs), July, 1991. Published in German by the Europaische Rundschau in the Fall of 1991.
"The Life and Death of Integration in Yugoslavia",  Mediterranean Quarterly,  Spring, 1992
"Torn Curtain" (with Harold E.Engle),  Foreign Service Journal June, 1993
"The Voices of America", World & I, November, 1993
"Eberhard P. Deutsch: A Comment"  Austrian Information (Washington, D.C.) Vol.49, No. 11, 1996
"Austria as a Model", Foreign Policy, Fall,  1996
"Follow the Austrian Model", Washington Quarterly,  Winter, 1997
"The Only Good Serb is a..." (With David Binder), Mediterranean Quarterly,  Summer, 1998
"Serbs as Victims", The Washington Post, April 10, 1999
"Government Broadcasting",  Virtual Diplomacy (Net diplomacy-Beyond Old Borders) U.S. Institute of Peace, August, 2002
"Rebuilding Public Diplomacy" (with Barry Fulton), National Strategy Forum Review, Spring, 2004
"The Evolution of Diplomacy" Mediterranean Quarterly, Summer, 2006 
"What is Public Diplomacy? Past Practices, Present Conduct, Possible Future", Mediterranean Quarterly, Fall, 2007 
"Rebooting America's Image Abroad", WhirledView, February 14, 2009 
"The Voice of America – Origins and Recollections", American Diplomacy, Oct.26, 2009 
"The Voice of America – Origins and Recollections II", American Diplomacy, Jan.11, 2011 
"The Israel Palestine Conflict:  1967 Lines with Mutually Agreed Swaps", American Diplomacy, Sept.21, 2011 
"The Day Austria Disappeared from the Map", American Diplomacy, February 2012 
"Years of Self-Inflicted Disasters – Austria Before Annexation in 1938", American Diplomacy, May 2012 
"Austria Redux – How Austria Reappeared on the Map of Europe", American Diplomacy, September 2013 
"Tito – Personal Reflections", American Diplomacy, February 2014 


References


External links
The Voice of America: Origins and Recollections by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
"The Voice of American: Origins and Recollections II" by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
The Evolution of Diplomacy by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
"The Israel Palestine Conflict: 1967 Lines with Mutually Agreed Swaps" by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
"The Day Austria Disappeared From the Map" by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
"Years of Self-Inflicted Disasters – Austria Before Annexation in 1938" by Dr. Walter R. Roberts.
"Austria Redux" by Dr Walter R Roberts.

Wangshi (simplified Chinese: 网市; traditional Chinese: 網市; pinyin: Wǎngshì) is a town of Jianli County, Jingzhou, in southern Hubei province, China.


Administrative divisions
As of 2017, Wangshi had 2 residential communities (居委会) and 23 villages (村) under its administration.
Two residential communities:

Wangshi (网市居委会), Beikou (北口居委会)
Twenty-three villages:

Xiaotan (小潭村), Gaoqiao (高桥村), Batou (扒头村), Sanguan (三官村), Gaomiao (高庙村), Gumiao (顾庙村), Hengdi (横堤村), Jianxin (建新村), Beikou (北口村), Tiemiao (铁庙村), Yushi (予市村), Nianqiao (碾桥村), Wangshi (网市村), Xinlu (新芦村), Zhoutai (周台村), Miaolu (庙芦村), Sansheng (三圣村), Tiezui (铁嘴村), Minglu (明芦村), Datan (大潭村), Liulian (刘连村), Liuwang (刘王村), Xinshan/sha (新杉村)


See also
List of township-level divisions of Hubei


References

War 3010: The Revolution is a turn-based strategy video game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System developed and published by American studio Advanced Productions. It was released in 1996 only for North America. The story takes place in 3010 and is the sequel to War 2410.


Plot

In the years following the victory of humanity over the three other factions in the fateful conflict of 2410, most of the known universe has been occupied by an intergalactic menace known as the Kyllen. Slavery, for most of the civilized species, only became an unavoidable reality once the freedom-loving citizens lost their political and social autonomy sometime in the year 2610. Even the humans have lost their freedom and must struggle in slavery amongst the rest of the universe.


Gameplay
In order to save humanity (and the rest of the civilized universe), the player must command a battle fleet; which was seized from the Kyllens by a group of human slaves. A space armada can be maintained each level by upgrading the vessels with the newest weapons and gears. Capturing starbases allow new ships to be constructed within a series of turns. The game uses the same strategy game feel as its predecessor, War 2410. Passwords allow players to play various mini-games (i.e., chess and checkers) in addition to restoring their progress in the game.


Reception

In a brief review for GamePro, Scary Larry deemed the game overly complex and said the static graphics and bland music made it dull to play. He gave it a 2.0 out of 5 in every category (graphics, sound, control, and fun factor).


References


External links
War 3010: The Revolution on MobyGames

Wesley Dean Carr (born 14 September 1982), known professionally as Wesley Dean and formerly as Wes Carr, is an Australian singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist. He won the sixth season of Australian Idol in 2008, subsequently releasing the singles "You", "Feels Like Woah", "Fearless" and "Love Is an Animal", and the studio albums The Way the World Looks (2009), Roadtrip Confessions (2013) and Australiana (2018). He has also recorded under the name Buffalo Tales.
In 2021, Carr relocated from Australia to Nashville, Tennessee, and began recording and performing under his middle name, Wesley Dean. His first album under the name was unknown, released in 2022. His subsequent album, Music From Crazy Hearts, was released in 2024 and was recorded at Nashville's RCA Studio A. The album accompanied the feature documentary project Crazy Hearts: The Documentary, which chronicles Dean and his family travelling more than 5,000 miles by road from Nashville to Los Angeles while performing at locations across the United States.


Early life
Wes Carr was born and raised in Gawler, South Australia, a town near the Barossa Valley on Adelaide's northern fringe. Carr took classes five nights a week at the Johnny Young Talent School, but eventually left Adelaide to live with his father in Sydney at the age of fifteen. From here on, Carr began his DIY education of the music industry, swapping time at school for time at bars, performing and meeting other musicians. His first big gig was supporting Australian band Leonardo's Bride for their last gig at The Basement Carr also played gigs with Missy Higgins, Lior, Paul Mac, Andrew Farriss of INXS and Don Walker of Cold Chisel.
On 3 November 2003, Carr released his debut EP Rhythm to Fly, independently. After Australian band Silverchair went into hiatus in 2003, Carr and Ben Gillies formed the band, Tambalane. Carr and Gilles parted ways in 2005 when an "unpleasant power struggle" emerged between the two. In 2006, Carr worked with C. J. Vanston in Los Angeles, where they co-wrote the song "Say My Name" for the film, For Your Consideration. On 11 June 2008, Carr released his debut studio album, Simple Sum, independently.


Australian Idol

In 2008, Carr auditioned for the sixth season of Australian Idol. In the top five round, Carr sang Michael Jackson's "Black or White" and received two touchdowns, including one from judge Marcia Hines and guest judge Jermaine Jackson. He also received another touchdown in the top three round, from judge Ian Dickson and a TV throw from judge Kyle Sandilands also he has never being in the bottom 2 or bottom 3 appearance. On 23 November 2008, Carr was announced the winner of Australian Idol of 2008 with Luke Dickens becoming the runner-up. He also became the first male winner to be born in Australia. As winner, Carr received a recording contract with Sony Music Australia, a car and $200,000 towards developing his craft.


Recording career


2008–09: The Way the World Looks
After coming out of Australian Idol as the winner, Carr signed to Sony Music Australia. His winner's and debut single, "You" was released immediately for download following his win on 23 November 2008. The song peaked at number one on the ARIA Singles Chart and was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA), for shipments of 35,000 units. Carr's second studio album, The Way the World Looks, was released on 20 March 2009. It debuted at number two on the ARIA Albums Chart and also certified Gold. "Feels Like Woah" was released as the album's second single on 13 February 2009. The song peaked at number fourteen and certified Gold. "Fearless" and "Love Is an Animal" were released as the album's third and fourth singles, respectively.
In May 2009, Carr embarked on a national tour to perform songs from the album. The national tour, "The Way the World Looks LIVE", began on 27 May and ended on 12 July. In September 2009, Carr served as a support act for Irish band The Script's Australian tour. In October, Carr toured with Ian Moss on his national "Shake It Up Tour". The tour began on 8 October and ended on 19 December. At the 2009 ARIA Music Awards, "You" was nominated for "Highest Selling Single", but lost to Jessica Mauboy's "Running Back".


2011–present: Buffalo Tales and Roadtrip Confessions

Carr's third studio album was scheduled to be released in 2012. In an interview with Adelaide Now, Carr said he wrote the album on his travels to Los Angeles, Nashville, London and Paris, and is full of "personal, candid stories." Its lead single "Been a Long Time" was released for digital download on 10 June 2011. The single peaked at number 33 on the ARIA Singles Chart. In November 2011, Carr announced on that he was no longer with Sony and would release his album independently.
In August 2012, Carr released an EP titled Blood & Bone under the pseudonym Buffalo. This was later changed to Buffalo Tales, given a multitude of artists using the Buffalo moniker. In April 2013, Carr uploaded a cover of Diamonds by Rihanna. The cover was praised on Twitter by Sia, one of the song's co-writers. In May 2013, Carr released "Amsterdam" the lead single from his third studio album – and debut as Buffalo Tales – entitled Roadtrip Confessions. A video for "Amsterdam" was released on 5 June 2013. The single did not chart. Roadtrip Confessions was released on 21 June 2013 and debuted at number 83 on the ARIA Album Chart. The next single was "Puppet Strings".
In November 2016, Carr featured in the Catherine Britt single, "F U Cancer" alongside Kasey Chambers, Beccy Cole, Lyn Bowtell, Josh Pyke and Wendy Matthews.


2018–2020: Australiana
In December, Carr self-released a new studio album titled Australiana. The album is a covers album of songs performed by Australian artists.


2021–present: Wesley Dean and Nashville
In 2021, Carr relocated with his family from Australia to Nashville, Tennessee, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the move, he began recording and performing under the name Wesley Dean, using his middle name professionally. Dean described the change as the beginning of a new phase of his career, separate from his previous success as Wes Carr in Australia.
Dean released the album unknown in 2022. The album marked his first full-length release under the Wesley Dean name and followed his move to Nashville.


Music From Crazy Hearts
Dean released his studio album Music From Crazy Hearts on 26 April 2024. The album was recorded at Nashville's historic RCA Studio A and incorporates elements of country, Americana, rock and gospel. It was his second full-length release under the Wesley Dean name.
The album was developed alongside Crazy Hearts: The Documentary, a feature-length documentary following Dean and his family during a road trip of more than 5,000 miles from Nashville to Los Angeles. The journey included performances and stops in locations including Memphis, New Orleans, Luckenbach, Marfa and Las Vegas, and was filmed by a director and cameraperson travelling with the family.
The album produced several singles and accompanying music videos, including "Burn This House", "Don't Look Back" featuring Sarah Buxton, "Gunslinger", "Blood Brothers" and "Mercy".
In October 2024, Dean released the music video for "Crazy Hearts", produced in collaboration with Nashville Ballet. The video was choreographed by Nashville Ballet artistic director Nick Mullikin and featured dancers James Lankford and Lily Saito.
Crazy Hearts: The Documentary was initially announced for release in 2025. By March 2025, the documentary was reported as being planned for release in 2026.


Personal life
In February 2011, Carr announced in the Australian OK! magazine, that he was engaged to actress Charlotte Gregg.
Wes married Charlotte in April 2012, and their first child was born later that year.


Discography


Studio albums


Extended plays


Singles


As lead artist


As featured artist


Music videos


Awards and nominations


APRA Awards
The APRA Awards are presented annually from 1982 by the Australasian Performing Right Association (APRA), "honouring composers and songwriters". They commenced in 1982.


ARIA Music Awards
The ARIA Music Awards is an annual awards ceremony that recognises excellence, innovation, and achievement across all genres of Australian music. 


Country Music Awards of Australia
The Country Music Awards of Australia (CMAA) (also known as the Golden Guitar Awards) is an annual awards night held in January during the Tamworth Country Music Festival, celebrating recording excellence in the Australian country music industry. They have been held annually since 1973.


References


External links
Official website 
Wes Carr's channel on YouTube

The Whitney School was a historic school in Boise, Idaho.  It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1982, and was demolished in 2008.
The school was originally built in 1926 to plans by Wayland & Fennell of Boise, replaced a building that had burned.  Ten years later, in 1936, Tourtellotte & Hummel designed large additions that were built on either end of the central building.  A further addition was built in 1946.
All of the sections were designed in a classical style, which helped to unify the sprawling, one-story structure.  The building was demolished in 2008 and replaced by the new Whitney School on the same site.


References

William Joseph Graham (September 23, 1877 – February 11, 1963) was an American insurance executive, who was Vice President of The Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States. He is known as "father of group insurance," and as past-president of the American Management Association.


Biography


Youth, education and early career
Graham was born in Louisville, Kentucky in 1877, son of William Thompson Graham Sr. and Anna Eulalla (MrDonogh) Graham. After attending St. Xavier College (now St. Xavier High School) in Louisville, he obtained his MA from St. Francis Xavier's College, now Xavier High School,  in New York.
In 1898 Graham started his career in the insurance business at the Sun Insurance Company of America as actuary. In the same year he joined the Associate of the Actuarial Society of America, where he was elected fellow in 1902, and later a Charter Member of the Casualty. He also became an Associate of the British Institute of Actuaries.
In 1902 Graham joined the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York, where in 1905 he was elected vice president and a director of the Northwestern National Life Insurance Company. In 1905 he also worked as consulting actuary. In cooperation with S. Herbert Wolfe he participated in the "investigation of the life insurance companies of New York conducted by a group of state insurance departments."


Later career and honors
In 1911 Graham joined the Equitable Life Assurance Society. From western superintendent of agencies, and superintendent of the Group Insurance Department, he was appointed second vice president of The Equitable Life Assurance Society in 1922.  In 1929 he was elected vice-president and in 1937 a member of the Equitable's board of directors. He retired from the Equitable in 1948, and served on its board until 1958.
In 1930 Graham had been elected president of the American Management Association, which he co-founded. In 1938 the Hobart College awarded Graham an honorary Doctor of Laws.


Personal
Graham died at the age of 85, in 1963, in the Southside Hospital in Bay Shore, New York at Long Island.


Selected publications
Graham, William Joseph. The romance of life insurance; its past, present and future, with particular reference to the epochal investigation era of 1905-1908,  Chicago, The World to-day company.
Articles, a selection
W.J. Graham, "Impressions of the Pittsburgh Convention," in: Management Review, Volumes 9–10, 1922. p. 3-6


References

William Slaughter may refer to:

William B. Slaughter (politician), American politician
William B. Slaughter (rancher), American rancher, cattle driver, banker and county judge
Billy Slaughter, American actor
William Capel Slaughter, co-founder of international law firm Slaughter and May

In SQL, a window function or analytic function is a function which uses values from one or multiple rows to return a value for each row. (This contrasts with an aggregate function, which returns a single value for multiple rows.) Window functions have an OVER clause; any function without an OVER clause is not a window function, but rather an aggregate or single-row (scalar) function.


Example
As an example, here is a query which uses a window function to compare the salary of each employee with the average salary of their department (example from the PostgreSQL documentation):
Output:

 depname  | empno | salary |          avg          
----------+-------+--------+----------------------
develop   |    11 |   5200 | 5020.0000000000000000
develop   |     7 |   4200 | 5020.0000000000000000
develop   |     9 |   4500 | 5020.0000000000000000
develop   |     8 |   6000 | 5020.0000000000000000
develop   |    10 |   5200 | 5020.0000000000000000
personnel |     5 |   3500 | 3700.0000000000000000
personnel |     2 |   3900 | 3700.0000000000000000
sales     |     3 |   4800 | 4866.6666666666666667
sales     |     1 |   5000 | 4866.6666666666666667
sales     |     4 |   4800 | 4866.6666666666666667
(10 rows)

The PARTITION BY clause groups rows into partitions, and the function is applied to each partition separately. If the PARTITION BY clause is omitted (such as with an empty OVER() clause), then the entire result set is treated as a single partition. For this query, the average salary reported would be the average taken over all rows.
Window functions are evaluated after aggregation (after the GROUP BY clause and non-window aggregate functions, for example).


Syntax
According to the PostgreSQL documentation, a window function has the syntax of one of the following:where window_definition has syntax:frame_clause has the syntax of one of the following:frame_start and frame_end can be UNBOUNDED PRECEDING, offset PRECEDING, CURRENT ROW, offset FOLLOWING, or UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING. frame_exclusion can be EXCLUDE CURRENT ROW, EXCLUDE GROUP, EXCLUDE TIES, or EXCLUDE NO OTHERS.
expression refers to any expression that does not contain a call to a window function.
Notation:

Brackets [] indicate optional clauses
Curly braces {} indicate a set of different possible options, with each option delimited by a vertical bar |


Example
Window functions allow access to data in the records right before and after the current record. A window function defines a frame or window of rows with a given length around the current row, and performs a calculation across the set of data in the window.

      NAME |
------------
      Aaron| <-- Preceding (unbounded)
     Amelia|
     Andrew|
      James|
       Jill|
     Johnny| <-- 1st preceding row
    Michael| <-- Current row
       Nick| <-- 1st following row
    Ophelia|
       Zach| <-- Following (unbounded)

In the above table, the next query extracts for each row the values of a window with one preceding and one following row:

The result query contains the following values:

|     PREV |     NAME |     NEXT |
|----------|----------|----------|
|    (null)|     Aaron|    Amelia|
|     Aaron|    Amelia|    Andrew|
|    Amelia|    Andrew|     James|
|    Andrew|     James|      Jill|
|     James|      Jill|    Johnny|
|      Jill|    Johnny|   Michael|
|    Johnny|   Michael|      Nick|
|   Michael|      Nick|   Ophelia|
|      Nick|   Ophelia|      Zach|
|   Ophelia|      Zach|    (null)|


History
Window functions were incorporated into the SQL:2003 standard and had functionality expanded in later specifications.
Support for particular database implementations was added as follows:

Oracle - version 8.1.6 in 2000.
PostgreSQL - version 8.4 in 2009.
MySQL - version 8 in 2018.
MariaDB - version 10.2 in 2016.
SQLite - release 3.25.0 in 2018.


See also
Select (SQL) § Limiting result rows


References

Woodards is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

Dan Woodards (1886–1964), English footballer
Danny Woodards (born 1983), English footballer
Victoria Woodards (born 1965), American politician


See also

All pages with titles beginning with Woodards
All pages with titles containing Woodards
Woodard (disambiguation)
Woodard (surname)
Woodards House, an historic building in Adelaide, South Australia
Woodward (surname)

Works is a compilation album of songs by the English rock band Pink Floyd, released in 
June 1983 by Capitol Records. It features a variety of material, including two of the band's early singles "Arnold Layne" and "See Emily Play", alternative mixes of tracks from The Dark Side of the Moon (1973) and the studio outtake "Embryo".


Release and contents

The album was released by Pink Floyd's former American label, Capitol Records, to compete with their then-current studio album The Final Cut. The album is particularly notable for including the track "Embryo", an outtake from the Ummagumma album that later became a concert staple in a greatly elongated form. Previously, the track had only appeared on a scarce various artists compilation album promoting Pink Floyd's UK label Harvest Records entitled Picnic – A Breath of Fresh Air in January 1970.
Some tracks are crossfaded into one another, such as "See Emily Play" into "Several Species ..." and "Fearless" into "Brain Damage". The album also opens with a heartbeat similar to the opening of Dark Side of the Moon that fades into the wind intro of "One of These Days". This creates a bookend effect on side 1, which ends with the heartbeat fadeout of "Eclipse".


Cover
The cover art, illustrated by Ron Larson, was inspired by the c. 1948 poster "Nederland industrialiseert" ("The Netherlands industrialise"), designed by Dutch graphic artist Wladimir Flem.


Track listing
Side one

Side two


Personnel
Syd Barrett — guitar ("Arnold Layne", "Set the Controls ...", "See Emily Play"), lead vocals ("Arnold Layne", "See Emily Play")
David Gilmour — guitar (all but "Arnold Layne", "See Emily Play", "Several Species ..."), bass guitar ("One of These Days"), lead vocals ("Fearless", "Embryo"), backing vocals
Nick Mason — drums, percussion, tape effects, vocalisations ("One of These Days")
Roger Waters — bass guitar, tape effects, lead vocals ("Brain Damage", "Eclipse", "Set the Controls ...", "Free Four"), vocalisations ("Several Species ..."), backing vocals
Richard Wright — keyboards, piano, synthesisers, backing vocals


Charts


References

Wyodak is an unincorporated community in east-central Campbell County, Wyoming, United States.


History
Wyodak began around 1925 and was established to house employees of the Wyodak Coal Company. In the 1960s, the company planned to mine the area, leading to the houses being gradually moved.


Transportation
The following highways pass through Wyodak:

 I-90 (Interstate 90)
 US 14 (U.S. Route 14)
 US 16 (U.S. Route 16)
 WYO 59 (Wyoming Highway 59)


References


External links
 Media related to Wyodak, Wyoming at Wikimedia Commons

YADIFA  (an acronym for Yet Another DNS Implementation For All) is a lightweight authoritative name server, written in C, with DNSSEC capabilities. It was developed by EURid.


See also
Comparison of DNS server software


References


External links
EURid Official Website

Rockwern Academy located in Cincinnati, Ohio, United States, is an  independent private pre-K-8 Jewish day school that caters to all Jewish denominations and to affiliated as well as unaffiliated Jewish families. The school was founded in 1952 as Yavneh Day School at a time when Jewish Americans had started to become more receptive to full-time Jewish schooling for their children.
The school is subdivided into a preschool, lower school, and middle school. It emphasizes both Jewish studies and general secular studies. In January 2008, the school changed its name in honor of Dr. S. Sunner Rockwern who donated four million dollars to its endowment.


Context and history
The roots of the school's origins are intertwined with the history of the Jews in Cincinnati. Many Jewish educational institutions were created and merged, and continue to do so, and Yavneh was part of that process:

The roots of the Cincinnati Community Hebrew School may be traced to founding of the Talmud Torah Society on March 1, 1887, with the purpose of providing Orthodox religious instruction for poor Jewish children… In 1901, the Society expanded… with tuition fees for those who could pay while an Orthodox female Sabbath School began in 1902. Classes were conducted in Yiddish until 1904. Schools served both Jewish children whose parents joined synagogues as well as the unaffiliated… Beth Am (founded in 1948) merged with the Talmud Torah Association in 1953. They were supported by the Jewish Welfare Fund… In 1966, the Hebrew Day Schools merged with Yavneh Day School, bringing Hebrew Day Schools into Cincinnati Community Hebrew Schools. In 1970, the CCHS reorganized, with the Cincinnati Community Hebrew Schools serving as an umbrella agency… 
Part of the main tenets of classical Reform Judaism as espoused by the Pittsburgh Platform was to reject the ways of orthodoxy and part of that was to send the children of their affiliated synagogues to secular public schools and to receive Jewish education at temple "Sunday schools" instead. The introduction of all-day Jewish schooling should be seen as significant in the midst of a city that was the birthplace of Reform Judaism.
After its founding in 1952 it faced an uphill battle to recruit students and retain its strength as a school:

Over the years, Yavneh faced many challenges to its future, but perhaps none was as great as the constant pressure to merge with another Jewish day school, Chofetz Chaim. The first overture from Chofetz Chaim came in 1959, when Rabbi Eliezer Silver tried to force a merger with Chofetz Chaim by summoning... to a rabbinical court of arbitration, or "Din Torah," to discuss his demand to absorb Yavneh's student body into that of Chofetz Chaim. Rabbi Silver was the respected recognized  leader of Orthodox Jewry in the US. A committee met in December of 1961 to discuss a merger, but talks foundered over a choice of school directors.
Yavneh subsequently merged with Beth Am and Talmud Torah to form the Cincinnati Community Hebrew Schools (CCHS) a move that reflected that the Yavneh leadership had rejected the overtures of the strictly Orthodox line of Rabbi Eliezer Silver (the accepted Dean Of Orthodox Jewy of the United States and Canada)  and was moving towards and an alignment with the non-Orthodox part of the Jewish community. During the 1970s there was a short-lived merger with the Cincinnati Hebrew Day school after which the school experienced greater enrollment.


Function and support
As a mark of its strategic importance to the Jews of Cincinnati it has been extremely successful in recent years in its fundraising. It has won significant support from the Jewish Federation of Cincinnati, the Jewish Foundation of Cincinnati, the AVI CHAI Foundation, and the Jewish Funders Network (an international organization of family foundations, public philanthropies, and individual funders dedicated to advancing the quality and growth of philanthropy rooted in Jewish values) among many others.


Change of name
As of January 2008 it was announced that:

A $4 million gift will establish an endowment for Yavneh Day School, which will take on the name of the donor, the Jewish Federation of Cincinnati said Friday.
The gift, from the Rockwern Charitable Foundation, will "reinvigorate and secure the future" of the Kenwood school, according to a news release. It also will kick off an effort to increase the endowment to $10 million by 2012.
In honor of the donation, the school will be renamed the Rockwern Academy, the federation said.
"Rockwern's trustees understand that today a top-quality, independent Jewish day school is an absolute prerequisite for any city that wants to support a vibrant Jewish community," said Shepard Englander, CEO of the federation, which secured the gift for the school and will manage the endowment.
The Cincinnati-based Rockwern Charitable Foundation was established by the late Dr. Samuel Rockwern. Yavneh Day School, founded in 1952, has more than 230 children enrolled in pre-school through eighth grade.


References and notes


External links
Official website

Yuan Baocheng (Chinese: 袁宝成; born December 1964) is a Chinese politician and the current mayor of Dongguan.  He was appointed vice mayor and acting mayor in 2011 by the Dongguan Municipal People's Congress.  The same body elected him mayor in 2012.
In February 2016, Yuan was appointed a vice-governor of Guangdong where he served until January 2018. In that month, Yuan was elected a vice-chairman of the Guangdong CPPCC.
Yuan earned a master's degree from Southwest University of Political Science & Law. 
Previously Yuan had been Vice Mayor of Shenzhen.


References

Yvon Jules Labre (born November 29, 1949) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player.


Early life
Labre was born in Sudbury, Ontario. 


Pro career

He was originally drafted by the Pittsburgh Penguins, for whom he played 37 games before being selected by the Washington Capitals in the 1974 NHL Expansion Draft. Labre scored the first-ever home goal for Washington, beating the Los Angeles Kings' goaltender Rogie Vachon. Although he was never one to put up big offensive numbers, Labre's value was noted in being a hard-nosed defensive defenceman on the ice and an active member of community programs and youth hockey programs off it. Such dedication to a team in a location not known for rich hockey history made him one of the Capitals' most popular players during his time there.
Labre served as team captain from 1976 to 1978. He remained in the Capitals organization after his playing career ended. At various times since his retirement, he has served as an assistant coach, colour commentator, scout and the director of community relations for the Capitals. Labre's jersey number (#7) was retired by the Capitals on November 22, 1981, and he is the only player in franchise history to wear the number.


Career statistics


External links
Biographical information and career statistics from NHL.com, or Eliteprospects.com, or Hockey-Reference.com, or The Internet Hockey Database
Profile at hockeydraftcentral.com

Zaghu (Persian: زاغو) is a village in Arabkhaneh Rural District of Sardaran District in Nehbandan County, South Khorasan province, Iran.


Demographics


Population
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the village's population was 23 in five households, when it was in Meyghan Rural District of the Central District. The following census in 2011 counted 19 people in four households. The 2016 census measured the population of the village as below the reporting threshold.
In 2020, Zaghu was separated from the district in the formation of Sardaran District and transferred to Arabkhaneh Rural District in the new district.


See also
 Iran portal


Notes


References

Zelenkov (feminine: Zelenkova) is a Russian and Ukrainian surname. Latvianized form: Zelenkovs.  Notable people with the surname include:

Aleksandr Zelenkov (born 1991), Russian wrestler
Ekaterina Zelenkova, Russian handball player
Olga Zelenkova, Soviet swimmer


See also
All pages with titles containing Zelenkov
All pages with titles containing Zelenkova

Čárajávri is a lake in Guovdageainnu Municipality in Finnmark county, Norway. The 7-square-kilometre (2.7 sq mi) lake lies on the Finnmarksvidda plateau, about 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of the village of Masi.


See also
List of lakes in Norway


References

İzmir Büyükşehir Belediye Gençlik ve Spor Kulübü Kadın Sutopu Takımı  (English: İzmir Metropolitan Municipality Youth and Sports Club Women's Water Polo Team), commonly referred to as İzmir BB GSK Kadın Sutopu Takımı  (İzmir BB GSK Women's Water Polo Team), is the women's water polo team of the multi-sports club İzmir Büyükşehir Belediyesi GSK based in İzmir, Turkey. The team plays the home matches at Celal Atik Swimming Pool in Konak, İzmir.


History
The team finished the 2022–23 season of the Turkish Women's Water Polo First League, at which eight teams competed, as champion after play-offs. They were entitled for the first time to take part at the LEN Women's Challenger Cup. They became champion at the  2023–24 Challenger Cup at Zagreb, Croatia defeating Serbian team ZVK Crvena Zvezda in the final.


Current squad
As of 26 November 2023.


Staff
As of 26 November 2023.

Hüseyin Egeli, Chairman
Soykan Üstünkar, Head coach
Uğurcan Kocataş, Trainer


Honours


European competitions
LEN Women's Challenger Cup
Champions (2): 2023–24, 2024–25.


Domestic competitions
Turkish Women's Water Polo First League
Champions (1): 2022–23.
Women's Water Polo Turkish Cup
Champions (1): 2021.
Turkish Women's U-19 Water Polo League
. Champions (1): 2022.

Women's U-19 Water Polo Federation Cup
Runners-up (1): 2021.
Girls' U-17 Water Polo Federation Cup
Champions (1): 2021.
Girls' U-15 Water Polo Federation Cup
Runners-up (1): 2021.


References

